Internet Governance
Editor: Virgilio A.F. Almeida • virgilio@dcc.ufmg.br

A Layered Model for
AI Governance
Urs Gasser and Virgilio A.F. Almeida • Harvard University

AI-based systems are “black boxes,” resulting in massive information
asymmetries between the developers of such systems and consumers and
policymakers. In order to bridge this information gap, this article proposes a
conceptual framework for thinking about governance for AI.

M

any sectors of society rapidly adopt digital technologies and big data, resulting
in the quiet and often seamless integration of AI, autonomous systems, and algorithmic decision-making into billions of human
lives.1,2 AI and algorithmic systems already
guide a vast array of decisions in both private
and public sectors. For example, private global
platforms, such as Google and Facebook, use
AI-based filtering algorithms to control access
to information. AI algorithms that control selfdriving cars must decide on how to weigh the
safety of passengers and pedestrians.3 Various applications, including security and safety
decision-making systems, rely heavily on AIbased face recognition algorithms. And a recent
study from Stanford University describes an
AI algorithm that can deduce the sexuality of
people on a dating site with up to 91 percent
accuracy.4 Voicing alarm at the capabilities
of AI evidenced within this study, and as AI
technologies move toward broader adoption,
some voices in society have expressed concern about the unintended consequences and
potential downsides of widespread use of these
technologies.
To ensure transparency, accountability, and
explainability for the AI ecosystem, our governments, civil society, the private sector, and
academia must be at the table to discuss governance mechanisms that minimize the risks and
possible downsides of AI and autonomous systems while harnessing the full potential of this
58

Published by the IEEE Computer Society

technology.5 Yet the process of designing a governance ecosystem for AI, autonomous systems,
and algorithms is complex for several reasons.
As researchers at the University of Oxford
point out,3 separate regulation solutions for
decision-making algorithms, AI, and robotics could misinterpret legal and ethical challenges as unrelated, which is no longer accurate
in today’s systems. Algorithms, hardware,
software, and data are always part of AI and
autonomous systems. To regulate ahead of time
is difficult for any kind of industry. Although
AI technologies are evolving rapidly, they are
still in the development stages. A global AI
governance system must be flexible enough to
accommodate cultural differences and bridge
gaps across different national legal systems.
While there are many approaches we can take
to design a governance structure for AI, one
option is to take inspiration from the development and evolution of governance structures
that act on the Internet environment. Thus, here
we discuss different issues associated with governance of AI systems, and introduce a conceptual framework for thinking about governance
for AI, autonomous systems, and algorithmic
decision-making processes.

The Nature of AI
Although AI-based applications are increasingly adopted in hospitals, courtrooms, schools,
at home, and on the road to support (and in some
instances, even guide) human decision-making,

1089-7801/17/$33.00 © 2017 IEEE

IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING

A Layered Model for AI Governance

currently there is no universally
accepted definition of AI, a term
coined in the mid-1950s by US researchers.6,7 One reason for the lack
of a definition is that AI, from a
technical perspective, is not a single
technology, but rather a set of techniques and subdisciplines ranging
from areas such as speech recognition and computer vision to attention
and memory, to name just a few.6
From a phenomenological perspective, however, the term AI is often used as an umbrella term to refer
to a certain degree of autonomy exhibited in advanced health diagnostic systems, next-generation digital
tutors, self-driving cars, and other
AI-based applications. Often, such
applications in turn impact human
behavior and evolve dynamically in
ways that are at times unforeseen
by the systems’ designers. In this
context, the differentiation between
weak (or narrow) and strong (or general) AI is often used and helpful
when discussing the nature of AI.
Weak AI describes the current generation of applications that are focused
on a relatively narrow task such as
playing a game, recognizing a voice,
or detecting certain patterns on a
CT-scan. Strong AI, in contrast,
refers to machines with genuine
intelligence and self-awareness in
the sense that the machine has the
ability to apply intelligence to any
problem.8 At present, the technical
possibility and (potential) societal
impact of strong AI is discussed
controversially, while the current
adaptation of weak AI already leads
to a series of real governance issues that deserve attention in the
present.

AI Governance Challenges
Following a typical pattern when
new technologies become more
widely
available,
policymakers
and other stakeholders are focusing largely on the risks and harms
of AI-based technologies.9 Again,
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017

similar to previous conversations
about digital technologies’ impact on
society, the challenges related to AI,
autonomous systems, and algorithms
are often presented and discussed in
the form of lists of substantive issues
(including policy, legal, governance,
and ethical considerations) that must
be addressed.6
A recent roadmap on AI policy
by one leading expert, for instance,
identifies the following clusters of
core issues and questions where AI
applications either lead to new challenges or amplify pre-existing policy
concerns and pressure points10:

on public finances if robots don’t
pay taxes?
Such lists of substantive issues,
to which several others could be
added (for instance, intellectual
property or liability), can be supplemented by cross-cutting themes
surrounding transparency, accountability, and explainability; inclusion
and fairness; global governance; and
more that span across the different
application areas of AI-based systems (see https://cyber.harvard.edu
/research/ai/usecases).

Models for AI Governance
• Justice and equality. To what extent can AI systems be designed
and operated to reflect human
values such as fairness, accountability, and transparency
and avoid (new) inequalities and
biases?
• Use of force. As AI-based systems
are now involved in making decisions about the use of force — for
instance, in the case of autonomous weapons — how much human
control is necessary or required?
Who bears responsibility for the
AI-based outputs?
• Safety and certification. Particularly where AI-based systems
have a physical manifestation,
how do we define and validate
safety thresholds — for instance,
through standard-setting and
certification?
• Privacy. As AI-systems are enabled and powered by data, what
are the privacy implications and
new privacy threats of nextgeneration technologies — for
instance, in terms of government
surveillance or corporate influence over customers?
• Displacement of labor and taxation. To what extent will AIbased machines replace jobs
previously performed by humans,
or at least transform what labor
means? What are the effects of AI

When considering future governance
models for AI that address the aforementioned issues, it might be helpful and necessary to move beyond
such lists and consider some of the
larger structural challenges associated with the “regulation” (broadly
defined) of AI-based technologies.
In the following, we highlight three
such challenges that translate into
design requirements for a future
governance model of AI.
Information asymmetries. While AI
has the potential to shape the lives of
billions of people, only a few experts
really understand the underlying
techniques. AI-based systems are often inscrutable, sometimes resulting
in massive information asymmetries
between the developers of such systems and other stakeholders, including consumers and policymakers.
An effective governance system for
AI needs to incorporate mechanisms
aimed at improving our collective
understanding of the AI phenomenon in its different manifestations
and contexts of application.
Finding normative consensus. The
current policy and governance debate is largely focused on risks and
challenges associated with AI. But
AI also offers tremendous potential
benefits to society, as the discussions
59

Internet Governance

The Layered Model
Society

Timing

Social & legal
layer

r r Norms
r r Regulation
r r Legislation

Long-term

Ethical layer

r r Criteria
r r Principles

Mid-term

r r Data governance
r r Algorithm accountability
r r Standards

Near-term

Technical layer
Algorithms & data

AI systems

Figure 1. A layered model for AI governance. The interacting layers (which sit
between society and AI applications) are social and legal; ethical; and technical
foundations that support the ethical and social layers.

about the use of AI in the context
of Sustainable Development Goals
illustrate (see www.itu.int/en/ITU-T
/A I/Pages/201706-defau lt.aspx).
A governance model must open
up spaces for cost-benefit analyses
and normative consensus building among different stakeholders,
particularly where tradeoffs are
involved in the design of AI systems. A future governance model
also needs to deal with normative differences among contexts
and geographies, and provide for
interoperability among different
frameworks and approaches.11
Government mismatches. Even where
we have a shared understanding of
AI technologies, the underlying techniques, and societal consensus about
what is or isn’t desirable, the design
of effective, efficient, and legitimate means (strategies, approaches,
tools, and so forth) to resolve the
aforementioned substantive issues is
challenging, given the conditions of
uncertainty and complexity in the AI
ecosystem. But larger undercurrents
also put limits on traditional approaches to law- and policymaking
in the digital age.12
Taken together, these structural
challenges and associated design
60

www.computer.org/internet/

requirements for a future governance model of AI point away from
simple state-centric, command-andcontrol regulatory schemes toward
more complex approaches to governance emergent in fields as diverse
as the Internet, nanotechnology governance, or gene driver governance.
While the exact contours of a future
AI governance model are still in flux,
advanced governance models such
as active matrix theory, polycentric
governance, hybrid regulation, and
mesh regulation can provide both
inspiration and conceptual guidance
on how such a future governance
regime might be designed.13 In the
next section, we highlight one feature that is common across many of
these models: the idea of modularity
embodied in the form of layered governance, which also combines different instruments to grapple with
and address the aforementioned substantive issues, making it a shared
responsibility among all relevant
actors involved. It is important to
note that any such emerging model
must be situated in and interact with
existing institutional frameworks of
applicable laws and policies, particularly human rights, as the development and deployment of AI does not
take place in a vacuum.14

Modularity is one of the main mechanisms for managing complex systems. Modularity aims to reduce
the number of interdependencies
that must be analyzed by identifying which tasks are highly interdependent and which ones are not.15
Layering represents a particular
form of modularity, in which different parts of the overall system are
arranged into parallel hierarchies. A
frequently cited example of layering
is the Open System Interconnection
(OSI) Reference model used during
the late 1970s.15 Another example of a
layered model was proposed by David
Clark16 to represent the nature of
cyberspace using a model with four
layers, that are: first, the people who
participate in the cyber-experience;
second, the information that is stored,
transmitted, and transformed in
cyberspace; third, the logical building blocks that make up the services,
and fourth, the physical foundations
that support the logical elements. The
scale, heterogeneity, complexity, and
degree of technological autonomy
of AI systems require new thinking
about policy, law, and regulation. We
attempt to capture the complex nature of AI governance by using an
analytical model with three layers.
From the top down, the interacting
layers are as follows:
• social and legal;
• ethical; and
• technical foundations that support the ethical and social layers.
Figure 1 shows a representation
of the layered governance model. It
will sit between society and AI applications. The instruments mapped
onto the layers can be developed at
different times. In the near term,
governance proposals could concentrate on developing standards and
principles for AI algorithms. For the
mid- and long-term, nation-states
can work on specific legislation to
IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING

A Layered Model for AI Governance

regulate mature AI applications. The
model can be a helpful heuristic that
illustrates how principles, policies,
norms, and laws in response to AIbased challenges and opportunities
can be combined and work together,
within and across layers.

an insurance company and charges a
certain group of people higher premiums, based on variables such as gender or age, such a decision-making
application would be violating the
ethical principle of equal or fair
treatment.

The Technical Layer

The Social and Legal Layer

The technical layer is the foundation
of the AI governance ecosystem —
the algorithms and data out of which
it is built. AI systems and autonomous systems rely on data and algorithms, regardless of whether
they are physical systems (such as
self-driving cars and commercial
robots) or software systems (such as
criminal justice or medical diagnostic systems, or intelligent personal
assistants).17 A set of principles for
accountable algorithms and an associated suggested social impact statement were developed as part of a
Dagstuhl Seminar on “Data, Responsibly.”18 The proposed principles for
accountable algorithms with social
impact are as follows: responsibility,
explainability, accuracy, auditability, and fairness. The collection, use,
and management of data by AI algorithms, known as data governance,
should follow principles that promote
fairness and safeguard against race,
color, national origin, religion, sex,
gender, sexual orientation, disability, or family status discrimination.19

The social and legal layer could address the process of creating institutions and allocating responsibilities
for regulating AI and autonomous
systems. For example, Matthew
Scherer20 describes a policymaking
body that would have the power to
define AI, create exceptions allowing for AI research to be conducted
in certain environments without the
researchers being subjected to strict
liability, and establish an AI certification process. One starting point for
specific norms aimed at regulating AI
can be the principles and criteria that
emerge from the ethical and technical layers, in addition to pre-existing
and more general national and international legal frameworks, including human rights. The layered model
provides a framework for thinking
about AI governance, aiming at the
definition of appropriate behavior for
AI and autonomous systems.

The Ethical Layer
On top of the technical layer, we
could articulate high-level ethical concerns that apply to different
types of AI applications and systems.
One important source for the development of such ethical principles are
human rights principles. Another example of the emergence of AI ethics
norms is the IEEE general principles
for AI and autonomous systems.17
Actions driven by algorithms can be
assessed according to ethical criteria
and principles. For instance, when an
AI application analyzes the data of
NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2017

mplementing governance structures for AI and algorithmic
decision-making systems can occur
at multiple layers and involve blended
approaches. Here, we describe some
of these layers, taking into consideration that some of them would only be
considered if the risks that certain AI
applications present are substantial
and concrete. Governance processes
can range from market-oriented solutions to government-based structures and can be applied nationally
or internationally. On the regional
level, a rich example is the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
a wide-ranging and complex regulation intended to strengthen and unify

I

data protection for all individuals
within the European Union (www
.eugdpr.org). It offers a (limited) “right
to explanation” that will oblige companies to explain the purpose of an
algorithm and the kind of data it uses
when making automated decisions.21
Absent an AI-specific international
legal framework, a global oversight
body, which can take the form of a
multistakeholder committee, could be
the curator of global principles and
emerging norms for AI systems.
References
1. E. Horvitz, “AI, People, and Society,” Science, vol 357, no. 6346, 2017, p. 7.
2. National Science and Technology Council
Committee on Technology, Preparing for
the Future of Artificial Intelligence, tech.
report, Executive Office of the President,
2016.
3. S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, and L. Floridi,
“Transparent, Explainable, and Accountable AI for Robotics,” Science Robotics,
vol. 2, no. 6, 2017; doi:10.1126/scirobotics
.aan6080.
4. S. Levin, “New AI Can Guess Whether
You’re Gay or Straight from a Photograph,” The Guardian, 8 Sept. 2017;
www.theguardian.com/technology/2017
/sep/07/new-artificial-intelligence-can
-te l l-whet her-you r e-gay-or-st r a ig ht
-from-a-photograph.
5. I. Rahwan, “Society-in-the-Loop: Programming the Algorithmic Social Contract,” Ethics and Information Technology,
2017; doi:10.1007/s10676-017-9430-8.
6. P. Stone et al., “Artificial Intelligence and
Life in 2030: One Hundred Year Study
on Artificial Intelligence,” Report of the
2015 Study Panel, tech report, Sept. 2016;
https://ai100.stanford.edu/sites/default
/files/ai_100_report_0831fnl.pdf.
7. J. McCarthy et al., “A Proposal for the
Dartmouth Summer Research Project on
Artificial Intelligence,” 31 Aug. 1955.
8. E. Kumar, Artificial Intelligence, I.K.
International, 2008.
9. R. Brownsword and K. Young, eds., Regulating Technologies: Legal Futures, Regulatory Frames, and Technological Fixes, Hart,
2008.
61

Internet Governance

10. R. Calo, “Artificial Intelligence Policy: A
Roadmap,” Social Science Research Network (SSRN), 8 Aug. 2017; https://ssrn
.com/abstract!3015350.
11. J. Palfrey and U. Gasser, Interop: The
Promise and Perils of Highly Interconnected Systems, Basic Books, 2012.
12. C. Scott, “Regulation in the Age of Governance: The Rise of the Post-Regulatory
State,” The Politics of Regulation: Institutions and Regulatory Reforms for the Age of
Governance, J. Jordana and D. Levi-Faur,
eds., Edward Elgar, 2004, pp. 145–174.
13. R.H. Weber, Realizing a New Global
Cyberspace Framework: Normative Foundations and Guiding Principles, Schulthess 2014.
14. U. Gasser, “AI and the Law: Setting the
Stage,” Medium, 26 June 2017; https:/
/medium.com/berkman-klein-center/ai-and
-the-law-setting-the-stage-48516fda1b11.
15. C.S. Yoo, “Protocol Layering and Internet
Policy,” Faculty Scholarship Paper 454,
Univ. of Pennsylvania, 2013; scholarship
.law.upenn.edu/faculty_scholarship/454.
16. D. Clark, “Characterizing Cyberspace:
Past, Present, and Future,” MIT CSAIL,
v. 1.2, 12 Mar. 2010.
17. The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical
Considerations in Artificial Intelligence

and Autonomous Systems, Ethically
Aligned Design: A Vision for Prioritizing
Human Wellbeing with Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems (AI/AS),
IEEE, 2017; http://standards.ieee.org
/develop/indconn/ec/ead_v1.pdf.
18. S. Abiteboul et al., “Data, Responsibly
(Dagstuhl Seminar 16291),” Dagstuhl Reports, vol. 6, no. 7, 2016, pp 42–71.
19. National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology, Big Data:
A Report on Algorithmic Systems, Opportunity, and Civil Rights, tech. report,
Executive Office of the President, 2016.
20. M. Scherer, “Regulating Artificial Intelligence Systems: Risks, Challenges, Competencies, and Strategies,” Harvard J. Law
& Technology, vol. 29, no. 2, 2016; http://
dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2609777.
21. S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, and L. Floridi,
“Why a Right to Explanation of Automated Decision-Making Does Not Exist in
the General Data Protection Regulation,”
Int’l Data Privacy Law, 2017; https://ssrn
.com/abstract!2903469.
Urs Gasser is the executive director of the
Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University, where he
co-leads the Ethics and Governance of

AI initiative, and serves as a professor of
practice at Harvard Law School. His research and teaching focus on the interplay
between law and technology. Gasser is a
graduate of the University of St. Gallen
and Harvard Law School. Contact him at
ugasser@cyber.harvard.edu.
Virgilio A.F. Almeida is a faculty associate
at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University,
and a professor in the Computer Science
Department at the Federal University
of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil. His research interests include cyber policies,
large-scale distributed systems, the Internet, and social computing. Almeida
has a PhD in computer science from
Vanderbilt University. Contact him at
virgilio@dcc.ufmg.br or valmeida@
cyber.harvard.edu.

Read your subscriptions
through the myCS publications portal at http://
mycs.computer.org.

Subscribe today for the latest in computational science and engineering research, news and analysis,
CSE in education, and emerging technologies in the hard sciences.

www.computer.org/cise
62

www.computer.org/internet/

IEEE INTERNET COMPUTING

