Ulnicane, I. (2023) Against the new space race: global AI competition and cooperation for people. AI
& Society 38(2): 681-683 https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01423-0
Read only access link https://rdcu.be/cITgf

Dr. Inga Ulnicane https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2051-1265

Against the new space race: Global AI competition and cooperation for people

Abstract:
This Open Forum contribution critically interrogates the use of space race rhetoric in current
discussions about Artificial Intelligence (AI). According to this rhetoric, similar to the space race of
the 20th century, AI development is portrayed as a rivalry among superpowers where one country
will win and reap major benefits, while others will be left behind. Using this rhetoric to frame AI
development tends to prioritize narrow and short-term economic interests over broader and longerterm societal needs. Three particularly problematic aspects of using space race narrative in AI
discussions are highlighted: first, perceiving technology development globally as a zero-sum game;
second, pressuring governments to regulate less; and third, prioritising high technologies over social
issues. This contribution invites to challenge underlying political assumptions of the AI space race
discourse and to open up conversations about alternative futures.

Keywords: Artificial Intelligence; space race; politics; policy; discourse; competition

... the space dreams are problematic if the result is that earthly problems are neglected…
(Coeckelbergh 2020: 195)

Introduction
In recent years, a number of countries have announced their ambitions to be the world leaders in
Artificial Intelligence (AI) (Ulnicane et al 2021). Media and experts have often reinforced this
competitiveness rhetoric depicting AI development and use as taking place ‘amid fierce global
competition’ (European Commission 2018: 2) where one country is set to win and reap major
economic, political and military benefits, while others will lose and be left behind. Emerging global AI
rankings and comparisons (Savage 2020) further fuel this sense of urgent competition. AI
development has been presented as ‘the next space race’ where two AI superpowers - the United
States (US) and China - are competing for the world dominance (Allein and Husain 2017; Lee 2018).
Similar to the space race of the 1950s and 1960s when the two major powers of the time - the US
1

and the Soviet Union – were perceived as competing for their superiority in then cutting-edge space
technology, the development of AI as a key technology of the 21st century is presented as a rivalry
between the superpowers. This contribution aims to draw attention to the shortcomings of this
popular rhetoric and to the need for alternatives.

Flawed narrative of glorious space race
Today, the space race of the previous century still presents a powerful but flawed narrative. It is
known for facilitating major investments in technology (O’Mara 2019), and recently it has been
suggested that the lessons from the Apollo mission can help to achieve the United Nations’
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Mazzucato 2021). However, others are more sceptical about
the purposes - including ‘providing entertainment, propaganda, and a welcome distraction from
more pressing and tedious problems’ (Edgerton 2019: 19) - and benefits of the US civil space
programme. Moreover, heroic narrative of the space race glosses over its more problematic aspects,
such as exclusion of women (Bartels 2021) or politically complex life stories of its main architects
(ESA 2007; NASA 2017).

In the context of this special issue ‘AI for People’, one question of particular interest is if the
narratives such as ‘space race’ affect the lives of people. Did people even notice the beginning and
the end of the space race? The stories of the 20th century space race highlight how deeply it affected
American society and inspired young people to study science and engineering (Allen and Husain
2017; Mazzucato 2021). It might not had been the same for everyone everywhere. During the mid1950s, when the space race started, lives of many people in the Soviet Union and its annexed
countries might have been more affected by the regime thaw that followed the death of Stalin.
Those deported to Siberia could return but most of them were neither inspired nor allowed to join
the Soviet space programme. The end of the space race remains to be contested. According to one
version, a symbolic end of the space race was the joint Apollo-Soyuz mission in 1975 (Royal
Museums Greenwich 2021). It certainly did not change anything in lives of those living in the
communist countries who had to wait some 15 more years to get their basic rights and freedoms.

Space race and AI: Three problematic aspects
While the space race narrative is problematic in itself for many reasons, so is its use in AI discussions.
Using glorified and simplified version of the space race rhetoric to frame AI development tends to
prioritize narrow and short-term economic interests over broader and longer-term societal needs.
Three particularly problematic aspects of using space race narrative in AI discussions are highlighted

2

here: first, perceiving technology development globally as a zero-sum game; second, pressuring
governments to regulate less; and third, prioritising high technologies over social issues.

First, talk of the space race draws on a widely used discourse representing technology development
as a global competition among nations and regions. Some well-known historical examples are
European fears about the growing technology gap with the US in the late 1960s and American
worries about the Japanese supremacy in the 1980s (O’Mara 2019). Such concerns tend to trigger
calls for policies that boost competitiveness. However, it has been pointed out that the
competitiveness discourse is ‘a dangerous obsession’ (Krugman 1994) because countries do not
compete with each other the way corporations do. Technology development is not a zero-sum game
where one country wins and others loose. It can also be a positive-sum game where many people
benefit from technologies developed elsewhere. Additionally, implicit in this competitiveness
discourse is assumption that more is better – it is desirable to have as much AI as possible and as
fast as possible. However, having more AI and having it fast might not always be beneficial because
algorithms can discriminate, self-driving cars can kill, and computing is energy intensive.

Second, hyping the competitiveness discourse can put pressure on governments to regulate less.
Powerful business interests promoting anti-regulation agenda can strategically use the
competitiveness discourse to suggest that the European Union (EU) is lagging behind the US and
China because of its regulation such as the General Data Protection Regulation focusing on
safeguarding personal data, and imply that the EU should regulate less to become more competitive.

Third, the global competitiveness discourse has tendency to focus on attractive high technologies
rather than on complex societal issues. As reminded by the well-known ‘The Moon and the Ghetto’
metaphor (Nelson 1977), countries are more likely to compete which will be the first to go to the
moon rather than which will be the first to solve the problems of the ghetto. Global AI competition
discourse focusses more on which country will rule the world and harvest the economic and military
benefits rather than which will be the most successful in using AI for solving its most pressing social
problems. So far, rather than tackling social problems, the use of AI tends to exacerbate them
(Eubanks 2019). This highlights the need to ask questions about the purpose of AI development. Is it
only economic efficiency, national prestige and military supremacy? Or is it also addressing societal
challenges and the SDGs in areas such as climate change and global health? An emerging technology
policy paradigm sees addressing of societal challenges rather than just economic competitiveness as

3

its objective (Diercks et al 2019). To address societal challenges that often span national borders,
global cooperation rather than competition is needed.

Opening-up alternative futures
It is necessary to challenge popular but misleading narratives of AI space race or cold war (Bryson
and Malikova 2021). Challenging such narratives does not mean just checking comparative data on
national AI performance because the narratives of space race and cold war are not just about
comparing national indicators. Rather these narratives represent certain political goals, priorities,
ideas and values of the world they are trying to create. They can be challenged not by looking on
data and evidence but rather by questioning their underlying political assumptions. What is the
purpose of AI development and use? Who should benefit? Does it really make sense to compare AI
development across nations? Is nation a relevant unit of analysis here? Should we focus on
differences in type rather than differences in degree? Conversations about these questions can
shape alternative narratives about desirable futures with or without AI that represent multiplicity of
values and needs of diverse groups of people.

Acknowledgment:
This research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation Programme under the Grant Agreement No.945539 (HBP SGA3).

References:
Allen, J., and A. Husain (2017) The Next Space Race is Artificial Intelligence. Foreign Affairs, 3
November.

Bartels, M. (2021) ‘Mercury 13’ pilot Wally Funk will carry 60 years of history to space on Blue Origin
flight. 19 July https://www.space.com/wally-funk-mercury-13-astronaut-history

Bryson, J.J. and H. Malikova (2021) Is There an AI Cold War? Global Perspectives 2(1):
24803. https://doi.org/10.1525/gp.2021.24803

Coeckelbergh, M. (2020) AI Ethics. The MIT Press.

Diercks, G., H. Larsen and F. Steward (2019) Transformative innovation policy: Addressing variety in
an emerging policy paradigm. Research Policy 48(4): 880-894.

4

Edgerton, D. (2019) The Shock of the Old. Technology & Global History since 1900. Profile Books.

ESA (2007) Sergei Korolev: Father of the Soviet Union’s success in space.
https://www.esa.int/About_Us/ESA_history/50_years_of_humans_in_space/Sergei_Korolev_Father
_of_the_Soviet_Union_s_success_in_space Accessed 30 July 2021.

Eubanks, V. (2019) Automating Inequality. How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor.
Picador.

European Commission (2018) Artificial Intelligence for Europe. Communication. Brussels.

Krugman, P. (1994) Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession. Foreign Affairs 73(2): 28-44.

Lee, K.F. (2018) AI Superpowers. China, Silicon Valley, and The New World Order. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt.

Mazzucato, M. (2021) Mission Economy: A Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism. Allen Lane.

NASA (2017) Biography of Wernher von Braun.
https://www.nasa.gov/centers/marshall/history/vonbraun/bio.html Accessed 30 July 2021.

Nelson, R.R. (1977) The Moon and the Ghetto. An Essay on Public Policy Analysis. W.W.Norton &
Company.

O’Mara, M. (2019) The Code: Silicon Valley and the Remaking of America. Penguin.

Royal Museums Greenwich (2021) Space Race Timeline. Available at
https://www.rmg.co.uk/stories/topics/space-race-timeline Accessed on 26 July 2021.

Savage, N. (2020). The race to the top among the world's leaders in artificial intelligence. Nature
588(7837): S102-S102.

5

Ulnicane, I., D.O. Eke, W. Knight, G. Ogoh and B.C. Stahl (2021) Good governance as a response to
discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons for AI from other emerging technologies. Interdisciplinary Science
Reviews 46(1-2): 71-93 https://doi.org/10.1080/03080188.2020.1840220

6

