Artificial intelligence governance: Ethical considerations and implications for
social responsibility
By Mark Anthony Camilleri123
This is a pre-publication version.

Suggested Citation: Camilleri, M.A. (2023). Artificial intelligence governance: Ethical considerations and implications
for social responsibility, Expert Systems, https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.13406

Abstract
A number of articles are increasingly raising awareness on the different uses of artificial intelligence
(AI) technologies for customers and businesses. Many authors discuss about their benefits and
possible challenges. However, for the time being, there is still limited research focused on AI
principles and regulatory guidelines for the developers of expert systems like machine learning (ML)
and/or deep learning (DL) technologies. This research addresses this knowledge gap in the academic
literature. The objectives of this contribution are threefold: (i) It describes AI governance frameworks
that were put forward by technology conglomerates, policy makers and by intergovernmental
organizations, (ii) It sheds light on the extant literature on “AI governance” as well as on the
intersection of “AI” and “corporate social responsibility” (CSR), (iii) It identifies key dimensions of
AI governance, and elaborates about the promotion of accountability and transparency; explainability,
interpretability and reproducibility; fairness and inclusiveness; privacy and safety of end users, as
well as on the prevention of risks and of cyber security issues from AI systems. This research implies
that all those who are involved in the research, development and maintenance of AI systems, have
social and ethical responsibilities to bear toward their consumers as well as to other stakeholders in
society.
Keywords: AI governance; AI explainability; AI fairness; AI accountability; AI transparency; AI risks.

Department of Corporate Communication, Faculty of Media and Knowledge Sciences, University of Malta, Malta.
Mark.A.Camilleri@um.edu.mt
2
Medill School of Journalism, Media and Integrated Marketing Communications, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, United States of America.
3
The Business School, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom.
1

1

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is related to those technologies that simulate human intelligence, as they
can emulate decision-making processes and behaviors. Most of them can resolve complicated tasks
in an independent manner or with minimal interventions (LeCun et al., 2015; Zhang & Lu, 2021;
Zhang et al., 2023). AI is concerned with expert systems that rely on natural language processing
(Carvalho et al., 2019), speech recognition (Narwani et al., 2022) and/or machine vision (Silva et al.,
2022) to continuously learn through the acquisition of new data (Berente et al., 2021).
The benefits of AI are already being felt across a wide range of businesses (Dwivedi et al., 2021).
Various researchers already confirmed that AI applications can automate repetitive tasks including
data entry, invoice processing, online customer services, among others (Ribeiro et al., 2021). These
expert systems are characterized by their quick data analytical capabilities as they can optimize
workflows in different contexts, make complex decisions faster and more accurately than humans,
leading to increased efficiencies and productivity levels in various industries (Javaid et al., 2021; Ng
et al., 2021; Wamba-Taguimdje et al., 2020).
AI-powered chatbots and virtual assistants can provide customer centered personalized
recommendations round the clock (24/7) (Camilleri & Troise, 2023; Selamat & Windasari, 2021).
Today’s businesses can obtain deep insights from the data they gather through online interactions
with customers and employees. Some of them are utilizing natural language processing technologies
that are capable of understanding the languages and jargons used in different businesses and industries
(Wu et al., 2022). Others rely on AI expert systems to extract information from complex documents
and data, automate business processes and workflows, drive effective and accurate decisions in a
flexible manner on premises and across a hybrid cloud (Sachan et al., 2020; Weber et al., 2022).
2

Hence, employees can dedicate more time to higher value work. For example, IBM Watson services
clients within different service industries (Magistretti et al., 2019; Strickland, 2019). IBM’s AI
solutions provide personalized responses to customer inquiries. Its customers include Lufthansa,
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and Ernst Young (EY), among others.
Currently, there are a number of academic articles that describe the use of AI for business applications
(Janiesch et al., 2021; Matytsin et al., 2023; Minkkinen et al., 2022; Mullins et al., 2021; Pai &
Chandra, 2022; Raisch & Krakowski, 2021). Most of them have even outlined their strengths and
weaknesses (Dauvergne, 2022; Huang & Rust, 2020). Very often researchers discuss about how the
advancements of AI are raising serious concerns among the businesses themselves and their
stakeholders including the governments, academia and civil societies, regarding the risk of possible
harm associated with the use intelligent, learning technologies (Galaz et al., 2021; John-Mathews et
al., 2022).
Recently, during a United States (US) Senate hearing, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman, one of the
developers behind ChatGPT, raised awareness about the opportunities and challenges of using AI.
Mr Altman also warned senators that it could spread disinformation, influence people and even
interfere with elections, among other perils. Hence, he urged policymakers to enact regulation for AI
governance (CNBC, 2023). A few commentators argue that AI is not always deployed in a
responsible manner, and/or is not managed properly (Butcher & Beridze, 2019; Erdélyi & Goldsmith,
2022; McBride et al., 2022; Minkkinen et al. 2023).
This research raises awareness on the importance of AI governance in an age where more individuals
and organizations are utilizing AI systems for different applications. Today, online users can easily
access conversational technologies like generative pre-trained transformers (GPT). Some businesses
3

are already availing themselves from facial recognition technologies. Arguably, these disruptive AI
technologies may be used in an irresponsible manner and/or for malicious purposes. Hence, their
adoption could raise serious concerns of different stakeholders in society. Various governments and
international organizations are stepping in with their commitment to protect their citizens and the
businesses’ interests. As a result, several regulatory authorities are outlining governance principles
and guidelines that are intended to support practitioners in the development of AI, ML and DL
technologies, with the aim to mitigate and reduce the risks associated with them. AI governance is
intended to minimize risks including the violations of privacy, misuse of personal information, bias,
discrimination, and the like.
For the time being, there are limited contributions that are focused on AI governance frameworks that
provide substantive (outcome-based) and reflexive (process-based) guidelines to practitioners who
are developing AI innovations. This research addresses this knowledge gap. Specifically, its
objectives are threefold: (i) To shed light on the latest developments in terms of regulatory
instruments, rules and principles on AI governance that apply to practitioners who are creating, testing
and implementing AI models; (ii) To describe the findings from a rigorous review of high impact
articles focused on “AI governance” and on the intersection of “AI” and “corporate social
responsibility” (CSR), and (iii) To raise awareness about the importance and timeliness of
formalizing responsible AI governance protocols to ensure that ML and DL systems are reliable,
dependable and safe for business and society at large. This contribution puts forward an AI
governance framework that is intended to promote accountable, transparent, explainable interpretable
reproducible, fair, inclusive and secure AI solutions. It clarifies the meanings of these essential
elements of AI governance that are meant to prevent unnecessary risks and occurrences from affecting
any parties. In conclusion, it discusses managerial implications for AI practitioners and policymakers.
4

The following section describes different governance frameworks and regulatory guidelines focused
on responsible AI, ML and DL technologies. Then, the methodology section clarifies how the data is
captured from high impact sources. It explains that the researcher relied on a rigorous systematic
review of articles about AI governance. Afterwards, it identifies different aspects of AI governance
and presents a discursive argumentation on the best practices that are intended for AI practitioners
and for the developers of autonomous learning technologies. In conclusion, it presents future research
avenues.
2. Background
Many companies are increasingly relying on AI algorithms, prior to making strategic decisions
(Janiesch et al., 2021; Rąb-Kettler & Lehnervp, 2019). The automated technologies are helping them
in their organizations’ performance. AI innovations can interact with online users through two-way
communications (Camilleri & Troise, 2023). Their dialogue formats enable them to respond to
questions (Thorp, 2023), to admit their mistakes (Barrot, 2023), and to even reject requests (Crawford
& Paglen, 2021), if they are not recognized as appropriate.
Several companies are using ML/DL algorithms for business process automation (BPA), fraud
prevention, malware detection, spam filtering, as well as for the predictive maintenance of
recommender systems, among other purposes (Engel et al., 2022; Romao et al. 2020). Such
technologies are also useful for customer relationship management (CRM) systems as they can
scrutinize email content and prompt business practitioners to respond to the most important messages.
Advanced systems are equipped to provide fast and effective responses to customers. Other ML/DL
applications are related to business intelligence (BI) and analytics, as algorithms can be used to

5

identify important information in datasets, and reveal patterns, trends, cycles and anomalies from the
big data as well as from small data (Carvalho et al., 2019). ML/DL may also be used in human
resources information databases to identify the best candidates for an open position, and for other
business purposes.
DL algorithms enable computers and their artificial neural networks to collect and process data like
a human brain. They can complex patterns in texts, images, audio and video, and can provide reliable
insights and predictions into the future (Buhmann & Fieseler, 2023; Lin & Huang, 2020). The deeplearning architectures include deep belief networks, deep neural networks, deep reinforcement
learning, convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, and transformers are applied in
various fields including for bioinformatics, computer vision, machine translation, material inspection,
natural language processing, and speech recognition, among other areas (LeCun et al., 2015).
Frequently, DL algorithms are yielding significant results that are similar to (and in some cases, are
even surpassing) the human experts’ performance.
Such developments call for AI governance (Erdélyi & Goldsmith, 2022; Filgueiras, 2022; Gonzalez
et al., 2020; Mullins et al., 2021; Papagiannidis et al., 2023) and corporate responsibility (Dauvergne,
2022; Du & Xie, 2021; Frank, 2021, Li & Li, 2021) to ensure that humanity can easily access and
benefit from AI systems, in a protected, safe and secure environment. Every person who is involved
in the advancement of AI ought to be accountable for their innovations (Raji et al., 2020). AI models
are incrementally improving the accuracy of their algorithms and are offering human-like
performance for service businesses in areas like automated decision-making systems and
recommender systems, among other solutions.

6

However, in reality, there are still a number of challenges for business practitioners to keep up the
pace with the latest developments in the real world and with the proliferation of rich data that
could/could not be uploaded into AI systems (for various reasons). What is/was learned by AI systems
may quickly become obsolete or outdated and could no longer be applicable in the near future (Thorp,
2023). For example, when ChatGPT is asked about the reliability of its responses, it answered in the
following manner:
“AI language model, ChatGPT strives to provide accurate and helpful responses based on the input
it received. However, it’s important to note that my responses are generated algorithmically, and
therefore, there may be instances where my responses are not completely accurate or may not fully
address the question being asked. Additionally, my responses are based on the data available to me
at the time of my training and knowledge cutoff date, so any new developments or information that
have emerged since then, may not be reflected in my responses. It’s always a good idea to verify
information obtained from any source, including AI language models like ChatGPT, with other
credible sources to ensure its accuracy and reliability” (ChatGPT, 20th March 2023).
When it was questioned about its cutoff date, ChatGPT indicated that any events, developments or
information that occurred after September 2021 were not reflected in its responses. Its automated
decisions may be incorrect, or not factual, as their algorithms are not always up to date.
For the time being, practitioners can avail themselves of certain technologies to help implement
guardrails at every stage of the AI lifecycle. They could include preventative security policies and
practices. They may track all activities of AI models, check that relevant controls are in place, during
data collection and instrumental processing, to minimize risks to their customers (like service
businesses operating call centers) (Galaz et al., 2021; Hickok, 2022). They can also articulate ethical
7

principles and introduce transparent reporting to share information on their AI governance and about
responsible ML/DL initiatives (Minkkinen et al., 2022; Sætra, 2021).
Renieris et al. (2022) indicated that organizations should tie their responsible AI efforts to their CSR
strategies. They implied that core ideas behind responsible AI, such as bias prevention, transparency
and fairness, are already aligned with fundamental principles of CSR. For example, the International
Standards Organization’s social responsibility standard (ISO 26000) commends that organizations
ought to be accountable and transparent to their stakeholders. Its non-binding principles encourage
them to engage in ethical behaviors, respect the rule of law, respect international norms of behavior
and to respect human rights (Camilleri, 2019). This argumentation is also related to the organizations’
social license to operate paradigm (Camilleri, 2017), as they are expected to justify corporate
decisions and behaviors including about responsible AI governance with stakeholders including
policy makers, among others.
Table 1 features a summary of the most popular AI principles and guidelines that are meant to support
practitioners who are developing, testing and using AI designs and applications.

8

Table 1. Regulatory principles and guidelines for artificial intelligence governance
Institution /
Organization
/ Business

Entity

European Union
(EU)’s Artificial
Intelligence Act
Policymakers

Organization

Singaporean
government’s
National AI
Strategy
United States’ AI
Bill of Rights
Institute of
Electrical and
Electronics
Engineers
(IEEE)’s
AI Ethics and
Governance
Standards
OECD’s AI
Principles

Businesses

Microsoft’s
Responsible AI
(Principles)
IBM’s AI
Governance

Responsibility dimensions

Accuracy; Clear and adequate information; Detailed
documentation; High quality datasets that reduce risks and
discrimination; Human oversight measures; Logging of
activities to trace any tampering of data; Robustness; Security.
Explainable; Fair; Reproducibility; Robustness; Transparent.

Algorithmic discrimination protection; Data privacy; Human
alternatives consideration and fallback; Notice and
explanation; Safe and effective systems;
Addressing ethical issues during design; Child-friendly digital
services framework; Ongoing evaluations on the impacts of
automated systems on human well-being; Data privacy
process; Ontological standards for ethically-driven automation
systems and robotics; Transparency of autonomous systems;
Transparent employer data governance.

Accountability, transparency and explainability; Fairness and
human-centered values; Inclusive growth, sustainable
development and well-being of humans; Robustness, safety
and security.
Accountability and transparency; Fairness; Inclusiveness;
Privacy, safety and security; Reliability and safety.
Explainability; Fairness; Privacy; Robustness; Transparency.

9

2.1 EU’s Artificial Intelligence Act
The European Union (EU) put forward its proposed AI regulatory framework that is referred to “The
Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act)” in April 2021. This document introduced AI principles and a
legal framework for its member states. It specifies that its objectives are: (i) to increase the safety and
security of AI systems, as they have to respect relevant legislation on fundamental rights and should
reflect EU values; (ii) facilitate investment in automated systems; (iii) reinforce responsible AI
governance through regulations and principles; (iv) to create a trustworthy and safe eco-system for
the development of AI systems.
The EU Commission developed a risk-based approach pyramid that identifies four levels of risk: (i)
minimal risk, (ii) limited risk, (iii) high-risk, and (iv) unacceptable risk. It reported that end-users
should be informed that they are interacting with AI, to enable them to make an informed decision as
to, whether they should continue with their engagement with the machine or not.
The EU proposed that public authorities are entrusted to monitor the developments of AI products
once they are launched in the market. It requests AI developers to continue appraising the quality and
assurance of AI systems, and to undertake risk management assessments as they are expected to report
any serious incidents and malfunctioning in them.
2.2 Singapore’s National AI strategy
On the 25 May 2022, the Singaporean government launched A.I. Verify, an AI Governance Testing
Framework and Toolkit for companies that may want to prove that their AI systems are responsible
and trustworthy. Google, Meta and Microsoft among other businesses have already adopted the
Singaporean framework, to confirm their AI governance credentials. In sum, the guiding principles
10

suggest that AI systems ought to be human centric and their modus operation should be explainable,
transparent and fair.
Subsequently, the model framework integrated additional considerations like robustness (to conform
with IBM’s AI governance principles) and reproducibility, in order to increase its relevance and
usability. Singaporean’s framework also specified that AI developers and users ought to engage in
interactions and communications with a wide array of stakeholders (again, this is consistent with IBM
and Microsoft’s transparency principles).
2.3 The AI Bill of Rights
In October 2022, American policy makers released a document that identified five principles that are
meant to guide practitioners in the development and utilization of AI designs. Their “AI Bill of Rights”
is a voluntary guideline that is intended to protect the interests of American citizens who will be using
AI innovations. This document raises awareness on why AI’s automated systems ought to be safe and
effective for their users. It clarifies that AI designers, developers, and deployers have to ensure that
they are committed to safeguard their users’ data privacy and to protect them from algorithmic
discriminations. Their automated systems are expected to explain how and when AI is being used and
should provide clear information on how it works. Users ought to be in a position to opt out, when
they want, and to communicate with a human customer service agent to resolve queries or to find
solutions to their problems.
2.4 IEEE’ AI Ethics and Governance Standards
On the 17th January 2023, IEEE introduced free access to AI Ethics and Governance standards.
Currently, IEEE Standards Association (IEEE SA) provides free access to its global socio-technical
11

standards to guide practitioners to engage in trustworthy AI innovations. The standards advocate the
importance of transparency (of autonomous systems and of employer data governance) as well as of
data privacy. They address ethical issues of robotic and of other AI systems. In addition, one of IEEE
standards is focused on evaluating the effects of autonomous and intelligent technologies on all
citizens, including children. In fact, they make reference to the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child.
2.5 OECD’s AI Principles
As of May 2019, OECD has started raising awareness about its principles that guide practitioners in
the creation of innovative and trustworthy AI systems. OECD’s AI principles urge practitioners to
respect human rights and democratic values, in all stages of their research and development. Its
standards promote accountability, transparency and explainability; robustness, security and safety;
fairness and human centered values; as well as sustainable development and inclusive growth. OECD
specifies that all AI actors are expected to ensure that all of their procedures can be traced, to reduce
the risks of AI systems. It implies that everyone ought to be accountable for their actions. OECD has
also dedicated a standard to transparent reporting and disclosures of AI processes.
2.6 IBM’s AI governance
IBM dedicated a website to explain its guiding values and governance principles related to AI
applications and processes. It clarified that its foundational properties of its AI ethics rest on five
pillars: (i) explainability (AI designs that deliver seamless experiences); (ii) fairness (AI designs that
assist humans in making fairer choices); (iii) robustness (AI designs that are employed to make crucial

12

decisions); (iv) transparency (AI designs that reinforce trust through disclosures); and, (v) privacy
(AI designs that prioritize and safeguard consumers’ privacy and data rights).
The multinational technology corporation recognized the importance of articulating governance
policies based on principles, regulations and legislation, which are supporting it in its AI strategic
management and operations. IBM uses technology to implement guardrails at each stage of the
AI/ML lifecycle, during data collection and in its instrumenting processes. It is also transparent with
its reporting of AI activities for the benefit of different stakeholders. Its AI governance framework is
intended to operationalize AI with confidence through lifecycle governance, to manage risk and
reputation, to strengthen regulatory compliance and to meet stakeholder demands.
2.7 Microsoft’s Responsible AI
Similarly, Microsoft’s AI systems provide valid solutions for the problems they are designed to solve.
include capabilities that support informed human oversight and control. Its AI products are
customized to be consistent with the designs ideas of practitioners and are congruent with their values
and principles.
The company’s corporate website suggests that its AI governance is based on responsible dimensions,
including accountability, transparency, reliability and safety, privacy and security, fairness and
inclusiveness. Microsoft assures its customers that it regularly evaluates operational factors of its AI
systems, to determine whether they are performing reliably and safely. Its AI systems are subject to
ongoing monitoring, and evaluation processes to manage and maintain extant systems, to improve
them over time, troubleshoot problematic issues and to identify new uses. It methodically quantifies

13

the risks to minimize the time to remediation of predictable or known failures and to avoid mistakes
that may result in any harm to human beings.
Moreover, the technology giant confirms that is committed to protect the privacy of their users. It
adds that its secure features increase the reliability of data and protect personal data from being
disseminated with other users. It makes specific reference to AI security aspects including to data
origin and lineage, internal and external data usage; data corruption considerations, anomaly
detections, changes in the data that might indicate that there may be users who are trying to acquire
data.
Microsoft’s Framework for Responsible AI underlines that its systems are intended to treat diverse
people in a fair manner, by reducing existing stereotypes, cultural denigration, under-representation
and bias. It reported that its AI products are designed to provide a similar quality of service for various
demographic segments in society including to marginalized groups in order to minimize disparities
among different people. It suggests that its AI systems are inclusive as they empower everyone around
the world, making sure that no one is left out. It clarifies that members of minority communities are
involved in the research, development and testing of AI designs and solutions.
The technology company is accountable with its customers and partners about how its AI systems are
impacting the world, in order to make informed choices. Microsoft posits that it is transparent with
stakeholders as it is clear about the strengths and limitations of its AI systems. This is often referred
to interpretability or intelligent-ability, as AI is in a position to generate or to manipulate content
including visual, verbal or vocal communications.

14

3. Methodology
A systematic literature review (SLR) approach was used to scrutinize articles focused on AI
governance and CSR. This rigorous methodology ensures that the findings of this research are
rigorous and trustworthy, as other scholars can follow the procedures that are clearly outlined in this
SLR (Camilleri et al., 2023). Therefore, they could easily replicate and validate the results reported
in this paper.
The following search query was inserted through Scopus: TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "artificial intelligence
governance" ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE , "ar" ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( LANGUAGE ,
"English" ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( SRCTYPE , "j" ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2023 ) OR
LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2022 ) OR LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2021 ) OR LIMIT-TO
( PUBYEAR , 2020 ) OR LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2019 ) ). It sought to investigate articles
published in English, through journals that included the keywords “artificial intelligence governance”
in their title, abstract or keywords. The results indicated that there were thirteen (13) articles through
Scopus, that featured the specified keywords. Twelve (12) of these publications were also indexed
through Web of Science’s (WOS) Core Collections including in Arts & Humanities Citation Index
(A&HCI), Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI), Science Citation Index (SCIE) and/or in Social
Science Citation Index (SSCI).
The SLR reported that the most prominent (top ten) keywords that were used by researchers who
investigated AI governance were Artificial Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence Governance, AI
Governance, AI, AI Ethics, Artificial Intelligence Ethic, Artificial Intelligence Systems, Ethical
Technology, Decision Making and AI Systems.

15

Table 2 sheds light on the articles published though both Scopus and WOS outlets, since 2019. It
appraises the authors, outlines their research objectives and describe the methodology they used to
capture the data.

16

Table 2. List of articles focused on artificial intelligence governance
Authors

Date

Journal

Indexed
through
Scopus
and WOS
ESCI

Antonov

2022

Erdélyi &
Goldsmith

2022

Revista
CIDOB
d'Afers
Internacional
s
Government
Information
Quarterly

Scopus
and WOS
SSCI

Filgueiras

2022

Ain Shams
Engineering
Journal

Scopus
and WOS
ESCI

2022
FoschVillaronga et
al.

Computer
Law &
Security
Review

Scopus
and WOS
SSCI

Gonzalez et
al.

2020

Ain Shams
Engineering
Journal

Scopus
and WOS
SCIE

This article discusses about the Case study
concepts of artificial
intelligence, and governance
of smart cities.

Gonzalez et
al.

2022

AI and
Society

Scopus
and WOS
ESCI

The research relies on
bibliographic approach to
explore the decision-making
processes and policy
formulation through AI
systems.

Review

Hickok

2022

AI and
Society

Scopus
and WOS
ESCI

This research explains how
public entities use AI in
procurement systems.

Discursive

17

Research objective(s)

Methodology

This paper investigates AI
governance in the European
Union (EU) context.

Discursive

This research describes
Discursive
international AI governance
frameworks and regulatory
structures that are supporting
the development of
responsible AI practices.
The article uses an
Review
institutional theory perspective
to explore the design of AI
systems that affect decisionmaking processes in the public
sector.
Discursive
This paper investigates the
biases of algorithmic-based AI
systems in healthcare-related
applications.

Koniakou

2023

Information
Systems
Frontiers

Scopus
and WOS
SCIE

Minkkinen
et al.

2023

Information
Systems
Frontiers

Scopus
and WOS
SCIE

Mullins et al. 2021

Patterns

Scopus
and WOS
ESCI

This paper provides an
overview of the use of AI in
insurance applications. The
authors elaborate about AI
ethics in the financial services
industry.

Discursive

Papagiannidi 2023
s et al.

Information
Systems
Frontiers

Scopus
and WOS
SCIE

Qualitative
(interviews)

Schneider et
al.

Information
Systems
Management

Scopus
and WOS
SCIE

This research investigates AI
governance. It promotes the
development of robust AI
applications that are intended
to mitigate their negative
effects, in the context of the
energy industry sector.
This research explores the
governance of AI programs,
and machine learning systems.
The researchers clarify how,
who, what governs AI
technologies.

2022

This research provides an
overview on the developments
in AI governance. The
researchers elaborate on how
AI developments ought to
consider human rights and
ethical principles.
This research explores the
technological frames
technology-centered
ecosystems and responsible AI
(RAI).

Discursive

Document
analysis

Review

(Sorted in alphabetical order, as of 31st March 2023)

Table 2 clearly indicates that most articles (75%) that were captured through this review involved
secondary research methodologies as they were discursive contributions and/or featured literature
18

reviews. This finding suggests that, for the time being, there are few researchers who carried out
primary research activities focused on AI governance.
Another bibliographic study (through Scopus and WOS repositories) sought to explore articles that
included “artificial intelligence” and “corporate social responsibility”, as follows: TITLE-ABS-KEY
( "artificial intelligence" AND "corporate social responsibility" ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( DOCTYPE ,
"ar" ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( LANGUAGE , "English" ) ) AND ( LIMIT-TO ( SRCTYPE , "j" ) )
AND ( LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2023 ) OR LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2022 ) OR LIMIT-TO
( PUBYEAR , 2021 ) OR LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2020 ) OR LIMIT-TO ( PUBYEAR , 2019 ) ).
In this case, the results reported that there were thirty-six (36) articles indexed in Scopus. However,
fourteen (14) articles were excluded as they were not focused on AI or on corporate social
responsibility (CSR) paradigms. Alternatively, the discarded publications were not published in one
of WOS’s Core Collections (in addition to Scopus). Table 3 features all (22) articles on the
intersection of artificial intelligence and CSR. These contributions were published through both
Scopus and WOS journals, between January 2019 and March 2023.
This bibliographic study indicates that the most popular keywords on the intersection of AI and CSR
were: Corporate Social Responsibility, Artificial Intelligence, Sustainability, Machine Learning,
Sustainable Development, Business Ethics, Corporate Governance, Ethics, Health Care and Human
Resource.

19

Table 3. List of articles focused on artificial intelligence governance
Authors

Date Source title

Abina et
al.

2022 Sustainability

Aitken et
al.

2021 Technology in
Society

Alnamrouti 2022 Sustainability
et al.
(Switzerland)

Broer

2022 Social Science
and Medicine

Buhmann
& Fieseler

2023 Business Ethics
Quarterly

Carvalho
et al.

2019 Communications
of the
Association for
Information
Systems
2021 Journal of
Cleaner
Production

Damoah

Indexed
through
Scopus,
WOS
SCIE
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus,
WOS
SCIE
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
SCIE
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
ESCI
Scopus,
WOS
SCIE
AND
20

Research objective(s)

Methodology

This paper describes
sustainability and
leadership competency
models. The researchers
elaborate the use of
systems that detect the
individuals’ digital and
soft skills.
This paper investigates
socially responsible data
intensive innovation
within the private sector.
This study sheds light on
the effects of corporate
social responsibility and
of organizational learning
on the sustainable
performance of nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs).
This research is focused
on one of Facebook's AI
program that is intended
to safeguard the
wellbeing of its
subscribers.

Discursive

This research explores
how and to what extent
corporate governance
structures are related to
ethical AI frameworks.
This research explains
that IBM’s Natural
Language Understanding
(NLU), can resolve dataanalytics problems.
This research investigates
the use of drones in a
healthcare supply chain
(HSC).

Discursive

Qualitative
(Focus
groups)
Quantitative
(survey)

Qualitative
(content
analysis)

Sentiment
analysis

Qualitative
(semistructured
interviews)

Dauvergne

Du & Xie

2022 Review of
International
Political
Economy
2021 Journal of
Business
Research

Du et al.

2022 Journal of
Business Ethics

Frank

2021 Journal of
Cleaner
Production

Krkač

2019 Social
Responsibility
Journal

Li et al.

2021 Production and
Operations
Management

Lin &
Huang

2020 Discrete
Dynamics in
Nature and
Society
2022 International
Journal of
Production
Research

Magas &
Kiritsis

WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus,
WOS
SCIE
AND
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
ESCI
Scopus
and
WOS
SCIE
Scopus
and
WOS
SCIE
Scopis
and
SCIE

Matytsin et 2023 Humanities and Scopus,
al.
Social Sciences WOS
Communications SSCI
and
A&HCI
21

This article reports that
CSR disclosures are not
revealing the
disadvantages of AI.
This paper evaluates
ethical issues related to
AI. The researchers
elaborate about ethical AI
practices and on socially
responsible behaviors.
This article links CSR
perspectives with AI
governance.

Discursive

This study explores
consumer evaluations
about AI products for
environmental
sustainability.

Quantitative
(hierarchical
linear
modeling)

This research discusses
about AI versus Human
CSR and CSI.

Discursive

This research examines
the effects on AI on CSR
and idiosyncratic risk.

Quantitative
observations

This research investigates
the use of deep learning
for forecasting accuracy
of financial data.
This paper outlines
opportunities and
challenges related to data
sharing through the
Industry Commons
Ecosystem (ICE).
The research is focused
on the use of AI among
enterprises.

Quantitative
(regression)

Conceptual
(Discursive)

Discursive

Discursive

Quantitative
(regression)

McBride et 2022 Managerial
al.
Finance

Scopus
and
WOS
ESCI

Minkkinen
et al.

2022 AI and Society

Pai &
Chandra

2022 Pacific Asia
Journal of the
Association for
Information
Systems
2019 Management
Systems in
Production
Engineering

Scopus
and
WOS
ESCI
Scopus
and
WOS
ESCI

RabKettler &
Lehnervp

Sætra

2021 Sustainability
(Switzerland)

Saurabh et
al.

2022 Journal of
Information,
Communication
and Ethics in
Society

This paper explores AI,
corporate governance and
socially responsible
investing options in the
financial markets.
This research examines
the use of AI for ESG
investment analyses.
This research investigates
the use of AI for CSR
purposes.

Scopus
and
WOS
ESCI

Scopus,
WOS
SCIE
and
WOS
SSCI
Scopus
and
WOS
ESCI

Literature
review

Qualitative
(semistructured
interviews)
Quantitative

This paper explores
Discursive
socioeconomic and
technological changes.
The researchers discuss
on their implications on
human resources
management and on
talent attraction.
This research explores the Discursive
environmental, social,
and governance (ESG)
impacts of AI.
This research links CSR
and ethics with AI-led
digital transformation.

Qualitative
(interviews)

(Sorted in alphabetical order, as of 31st March 2023)
Again, Table 3 confirms that most articles (41%) that were featured in this SLR exercise involved
secondary research methodologies. The majority of researchers who sought to explore the link
between CSR and AI, have yielded discursive, theoretical, and/or conceptual contributions. In many
cases, they presented a critical review of the academic literature.

22

4. Artificial intelligence governance
The term “artificial intelligence governance” or “AI governance” integrates the notions of “AI” and
“corporate governance”. AI governance is based on formal rules (including legislative acts and
binding regulations) as well as on voluntary principles that are intended to guide practitioners in their
research, development and maintenance of AI systems (Butcher & Beridze, 2019; Gonzalez et al.,
2020). Essentially, it represents a regulatory framework that can support AI practitioners in their
strategy formulation and in day-to-day operations (Erdélyi & Goldsmith, 2022; Mullins et al., 2021;
Schneider et al., 2022). The rationale behind responsible AI governance is to ensure that automated
systems including ML/DL technologies, are supporting individuals and organizations in achieving
their long terms objectives, whist safeguarding the interests of all stakeholders (Corea et al., 2023;
Hickok et al., 2022).
AI governance requires that the organizational leaders comply with relevant legislation, hard laws
and regulations (Mäntymäki et al., 2022). Moreover, they are expected to follow ethical norms, values
and standards (Koniakou, 2023). Practitioners ought to be trustworthy, diligent and accountable in
how they handle their intellectual capital and other resources including their information technologies,
finances as well as members of staff, in order to overcome challenges, minimize uncertainties, risks
and any negative repercussions (E.g. decreased human oversight in decision making, among others)
(Agbese et al., 2023; Smuha, 2019).
Procedural governance mechanisms ought to be in place to ensure that AI technologies and ML/DL
models are operating in a responsible manner. Figure 1 features some of the key elements that are
required for the responsible governance of artificial intelligence. The following principles are aimed
to provide guidelines for the modus operandi of AI practitioners (including ML/DL developers).
23

Figure 1. A Responsible Artificial Intelligence Governance Framework
4.1 Accountability and transparency
“Accountability” refers to the stakeholders’ expectations about the proper functioning of AI systems,
in all stages, including in the design, creation, testing or deployment, in accordance with relevant
regulatory frameworks. It is imperative that AI developers are held accountable for the smooth
operation of AI systems throughout their lifecycle (Raji et al., 2020). Stakeholders expect them to be
accountable by keeping a track record of their AI development processes (Mäntymäki et al., 2022).
The transparency notion refers to the extent to which end-users could be in a position to understand
how AI systems work (Andrada et al., 2020; Hollanek, 2020). AI transparency is associated with the
degree of comprehension about algorithmic models in terms of “simulatability” (an understanding of

24

AI functioning), “decomposability” (related to how individual components work), and algorithmic
transparency (this is associated to the algorithms’ visibility).
In reality, it is difficult to understand how AI systems, including deep learning models and their
neural networks are learning (as they acquire, process and store data) during training phases. They
are often considered as black box models. It may prove hard to algorithmically translate derived
concepts into human-understandable terms, even though developers may use certain jargon to explain
their models’ attributes and features. Many legislators are striving in their endeavors to pressurize AI
actors to describe the algorithms they use in automated decision-making, yet the publication of
algorithms is useless if outsiders cannot access the data of the AI model.
4.2 Explainability and interpretability
Explainability is the concept that sheds light on how AI models work, in a way that is comprehensible
to a human being. Arguably, the explainabilty of AI systems could improve their transparency,
trustworthiness and accountability. At the same time, it can reduce bias and unfairness. The
explainability of artificial intelligence systems could clarify how they reached their decisions (Arya
et al., 2019; Keller & Drake, 2021). For instance, AI could explain how and why autonomous cars
decide to stop or to slow down when there are pedestrians or other vehicles in front of them.
Explainable AI systems might improve consumer trust and may enable engineers to develop other AI
models, as they are in a position to track provenance of every process, to ensure reproducibility, and
to enable checks and balances (Schneider et al., 2022). Similarly, interpretability refers to the level
of accuracy of machine learning programs in terms of linking the causes to the effects (John-Mathews,
2022).

25

4.3 Fairness and inclusiveness
The responsible AI’s fairness dimension refers to the practitioners’ attempts to correct algorithmic
biases that may possibly (voluntarily or involuntarily) be included in their automation processes
(Bellamy et al., 2019; Mäntymäki, et al., 2022). AI systems can be affected by their developers’ biases
that could include preferences or antipathies toward specific demographic variables like genders, age
groups and ethnicities, among others (Madaio et al., 2020). Currently, there is no universal definition
on AI fairness.
However, recently many multinational corporations have developed instruments that are intended to
detect bias and to reduce it as much as possible (John-Mathews et al., 2022). In many cases, AI
systems are learning from the data that is fed to them. If the data are skewed and/or if they comprise
implicit bias into them, they may result in inappropriate outputs.
Fair AI systems rely on unbiased data (Wu et al., 2020). For this reason, many companies including
Facebook, Google, IBM and Microsoft, among others are striving in their endeavors to involve
members of staff hailing from diverse backgrounds. These technology conglomerates are trying to
become as inclusive and as culturally aware as possible in order to minimize bias from affecting their
AI processes. Previous research reported that AI’s bias may result in inequality, discrimination and
in the loss of jobs (Butcher & Beridze, 2019).
4.4 Privacy and safety for consumers
Consumers are increasingly concerned about the privacy of their data. They have a right to control
who has access to their personal information. The data that is collected or used by third parties,

26

without the authorization or voluntary consent of individuals, would result in the violations of their
privacy (Zhu et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022).
AI-enabled products, including dialogue systems like chatbots and virtual assistants, as well as digital
assistants (e.g. like Siri, Alexa or Cortana), and/or wearable technologies such as smart watches and
sensorial smart socks, among others, are increasingly capturing and storing large quantities of
consumer information. The benefits that are delivering these interactive technologies may be offset
by a number of challenges. The technology businesses who developed these products are responsible
to protect their consumers’ personal data (Rodríguez-Barroso et al., 2020). Their devices are capable
of holding a wide variety of information on their users. They are continuously gathering textual,
visual, audio, verbal, and other sensory data from consumers. In many cases, the customers are not
aware that they are sharing personal information to them.
For example, facial recognition technologies are increasingly being used in different contexts. They
may be used by individuals to access websites and social media, in a secure manner and to even
authorize their payments through banking and financial services applications. Employers may rely
on such systems to track and monitor their employees’ attendance. Marketers can utilize such
technologies to target digital advertisements to specific customers. Police and security departments
may use them for their surveillance systems and to investigate criminal cases. The adoption of these
technologies has often raised concerns about privacy and security issues. According to several data
privacy laws that have been enacted in different jurisdictions, organizations are bound to inform users
that they are gathering and storing their biometric data. The businesses that employ such technologies
are not authorized to use their consumers’ data without their consent.

27

Companies are expected to communicate about their data privacy policies with their target audiences
(Wong, 2020). They have to reassure consumers that the consented data they collect from them is
protected and are bound to inform them that they may use their information to improve their
customized services to them. The technology giants can reward their consumers to share sensitive
information. They could offer them improved personalized services among other incentives, in return
for their data. In addition, consumers may be allowed to access their own information and could be
provided with more control (or other reasonable options) on how to manage their personal details.
4.5 The security and robustness of AI systems
AI algorithms are vulnerable to cyberattacks by malicious actors. Therefore, it is in the interest of AI
developers to secure their automated systems and to ensure that they are robust enough against any
risks and attempts to hack them (Gehr et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020).
The accessibility to AI models ought to be continuously monitored at all times during their
development and deployment (Bertino et al., 2021). There may be instances when AI models could
encounter incidental adversities, leading to the corruption of data. Alternatively, they might encounter
intentional adversities when they experience sabotage from hackers. In both cases, the AI model will
be compromised and can result in system malfunctions (Papagiannidis et al., 2023).
AI models have to prevent such contingent issues from happening. Their developers’ responsibilities
are to improve the robustness of their automated systems, and to make them as secure of possible, to
reduce the chances of threats, including by inadvertent irregularities, information leakages, as well as
by privacy violations like data breaches, contamination and poisoning by malicious actors (Agbese
et al., 2023; Hamon et al., 2020).

28

AI developers should have preventive policies and measures related to the monitoring and control of
their data. They ought to invest in security technologies including authentication and/or access
systems with encryption software as well as firewalls for their protection against cyberattacks.
Routine testing can increase data protection, improve security levels and minimize the risks of
incidents.
5. Conclusions
This review indicates that more academics as well as practitioners, are increasingly devoting their
attention to AI as they elaborate about its potential uses, as well as on its opportunities and threats. It
reported that its proponents are raising awareness on the benefits of AI systems for individuals as
well as for organizations. At the same time, it suggests that a number of scholars and other
stakeholders including policy makers, are raising their concerns about its possible perils (e.g. Berente
et al., 2021; Gonzalez et al., 2020; Zhang & Lu, 2021).
Many researchers identified some of the risks of AI (Li et al., 2021; Magas & Kiritsis, 2022). In many
cases, they warned that AI could disseminate misinformation, foster prejudice, bias and
discrimination, raise privacy concerns, and could lead to the loss of jobs (Butcher & Beridze, 2019).
A few commentators argue about the “singularity” or the moment where machine learning
technologies could even surpass human intelligence (Huang & Rust, 2022). They predict that a critical
shift could occur if humans are no longer in a position to control AI anymore.
In this light, this article sought to explore the governance of AI. It sheds light on substantive
regulations, as well as on reflexive principles and guidelines, that are intended at practitioners who
are researching, testing, developing and implementing AI models. It clearly explains how institutions,

29

non-governmental organizations and technology conglomerates are introducing protocols (including
self-regulations) to prevent contingencies from even happening due to inappropriate AI governance.
Debatably, the voluntary or involuntary mishandling of automated systems can expose practitioners
to operational disruptions and to significant risks including to their corporate image and reputation
(Watts & Adriano, 2021). The nature of AI requires practitioners to develop guardrails to ensure that
their algorithms work as they should (Bauer, 2022). It is imperative that businesses comply with
relevant legislations and to follow ethical practices (Buhmann & Fieseler, 2023). Ultimately, it is in
their interest to operate their company in a responsible manner, and to implement AI governance
procedures. This way they can minimize unnecessary risks and safeguard the well-being of all
stakeholders.
This contribution has addressed its underlying research objectives. Firstly, it raised awareness on AI
governance frameworks that were developed by policy makers and other organizations, including by
the businesses themselves. Secondly, it scrutinized the extant academic literature focused on AI
governance and on the intersection of AI and CSR. Thirdly, it discussed about essential elements for
the promotion of socially responsible behaviors and ethical dispositions of AI developers. In
conclusion it put forward an AI governance conceptual model for practitioners.
This research made reference to regulatory instruments that are intended to govern AI expert systems.
It reported that, at the moment there are a few jurisdictions that have formalized their AI policies and
governance frameworks. Hence, this article urges laggard governments to plan, organize, design and
implement regulatory instruments that ensure that individuals and entities are safe when they utilize
AI systems for personal benefit, educational and/or for commercial purposes.

30

Arguably, one has to bear in mind that, in many cases, policy makers have to face a “pacing problem”
as the proliferation of innovation is much quicker than legislation. As a result, governments tend to
be reactive in the implementation of regulatory interventions relating to innovations. They may be
unwilling to hold back the development of disruptive technologies from their societies.
Notwithstanding, they may face criticism by a wide array of stakeholders in this regard, as they may
have conflicting objectives and expectations.
The governments’ policy is to regulate business and industry to establish technical, safety and quality
standards as well as to monitor their compliance. Yet, they may consider introducing different forms
of regulation other than the traditional “command and control” mechanisms. They may opt for
performance-based and/or market-based incentive approaches, co-regulation and self-regulation
schemes, among others (Hepburn, 2009), in order to foster technological innovations.
This research has shown that a number of technology giants, including IBM and Microsoft, among
others, are anticipating the regulatory interventions of different governments where they operate their
businesses. It reported that they are communicating about their responsible AI governance initiatives
as they share information on their policies and practices that are meant to certify, explain and audit
their AI developments. Evidently, these companies, among others, are voluntarily self-regulating
themselves as they promote accountability, fairness, privacy and robust AI systems. These two
organizations, in particular, are raising awareness about their AI governance frameworks to increase
their CSR credentials with stakeholders.
Likewise, AI developers who work for other businesses, are expected to forge relationships with
external stakeholders including with policy makers as well as with actors including individuals and
organizations who share similar interests in AI. Innovative clusters and network developments may
31

result in better AI systems and can also decrease the chances of possible risks. Indeed, practitioners
can be in better position if they cooperate with stakeholders for the development of trustworthy AI
and if they increase their human capacity to improve the quality of their intellectual properties
(Camilleri et al., 2023). This way, they can enhance their competitiveness and growth prospects
(Troise & Camilleri, 2021). Arguably, it is in their interest to continuously engage with internal
stakeholders (and employees), and to educate them about AI governance dimensions, that are
intended to promote accountable, transparent, explainable interpretable reproducible, fair, inclusive
and secure AI solutions. Hence, they could maximize AI benefits, minimize their risks as well as
associated costs.
5.1 Future research directions
Academic colleagues are invited to raise more awareness on AI governance mechanisms as well as
on verification and monitoring instruments. They can investigate what, how, when and where
protocols could be used to protect and safeguard individuals and entities from possible risks and
dangers of AI.
The “what” question involves the identification of AI research and development processes that
require regulatory or quasi regulatory instruments (in the absence of relevant legislation) and/or
necessitate revisions in existing statutory frameworks.
The “how” question is related to the substance and form of AI regulations, in terms of their
completeness, relevance, and accuracy. This argumentation is synonymous with the true and fair view
concept applied in the accounting standards of financial statements.

32

The “when” question is concerned with the timeliness of the regulatory intervention. Policy makers
ought to ensure that stringent rules do not hinder or delay the advancement of technological
innovations.
The “where” question is meant to identify the context where mandatory regulations or the
introduction of soft laws, including non-legally binding principles and guidelines are/are not required.
Future researchers are expected to investigate further these four questions in more depth and breadth.
This research indicated that most contributions on AI governance were discursive in nature and/or
involved literature reviews. Hence, there is scope for academic colleagues to conduct primary
research activities and to utilize different research designs, methodologies and sampling frames to
better understand the implications of planning, organizing, implementing and monitoring AI
governance frameworks, in diverse contexts.

References
Abina A., Batkovič T., Cestnik B., Kikaj A., Kovačič Lukman R., Kurbus M., Zidanšek A. (2022).
Decision Support Concept for Improvement of Sustainability-Related Competences, Sustainability
(Switzerland), 14(14), 8539.
Agbese, M., Alanen, H. K., Antikainen, J., Erika, H., Isomaki, H., Jantunen, M., ... & Vakkuri, V.
(2023). Governance in Ethical and Trustworthy AI Systems: Extension of the ECCOLA Method for
AI Ethics Governance Using GARP. e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 17(1), 230101.
Aitken M., Ng M., Horsfall D., Coopamootoo K.P.L., van Moorsel A., Elliott K. (2021). In pursuit
of socially-minded data-intensive innovation in banking: A focus group study of public
expectations of digital innovation in banking, Technology in Society,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101666
Alnamrouti, A., Rjoub, H., & Ozgit, H. (2022). Do strategic human resources and artificial
intelligence help to make organisations more sustainable? evidence from non-governmental
organisations. Sustainability, 14(12), 7327.
Andrada, G., Clowes, R. W., & Smart, P. R. (2022). Varieties of transparency: Exploring agency
within AI systems. AI & Society, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-021-01326-6
33

Arya, V., Bellamy, R. K., Chen, P. Y., Dhurandhar, A., Hind, M., Hoffman, S. C., ... & Zhang, Y.
(2019). One explanation does not fit all: A toolkit and taxonomy of ai explainability techniques.
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.03012
Barrot, J. S. (2023). Using ChatGPT for second language writing: Pitfalls and potentials. Assessing
Writing, 57, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100745
Bauer, J. M. (2022). Toward new guardrails for the information society. Telecommunications
Policy, 46(5), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2022.102350
Bellamy, R. K., Dey, K., Hind, M., Hoffman, S. C., Houde, S., Kannan, K., ... & Zhang, Y. (2019).
AI Fairness 360: An extensible toolkit for detecting and mitigating algorithmic bias. IBM Journal of
Research and Development, 63(4/5), 4-1.
Berente, N., Gu, B., Recker, J., & Santhanam, R. (2021). Managing artificial intelligence. MIS
quarterly, 45(3), 1433-1450.
Bertino, E., Kantarcioglu, M., Akcora, C. G., Samtani, S., Mittal, S., & Gupta, M. (2021, April). AI
for Security and Security for AI. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Data and
Application Security and Privacy (pp. 333-334), ACM Digital Library, New York, USA,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3422337.3450357
Broer, T. (2022). The Googlization of Health: Invasiveness and corporate responsibility in media
discourses on Facebook's algorithmic programme for suicide prevention. Social Science &
Medicine, 306, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2022.115131
Buhmann, A., & Fieseler, C. (2023). Deep learning meets deep democracy: Deliberative
governance and responsible innovation in artificial intelligence. Business Ethics Quarterly, 33(1),
146-179.
Butcher, J., & Beridze, I. (2019). What is the state of artificial intelligence governance globally?.
The RUSI Journal, 164(5-6), 88-96.
Camilleri, M. A., & Troise, C. (2023). Live support by chatbots with artificial intelligence: A future
research agenda. Service Business, 17, 61–80.
Camilleri, M. A. (2017). Corporate sustainability, social responsibility and environmental
management. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature, Cham, Switzerland.
Camilleri, M. A. (2019). Measuring the corporate managers’ attitudes towards ISO’s social
responsibility standard. Total Quality Management & Business Excellence, 30(13-14), 1549-1561.
Camilleri, M. A., Troise, C., Strazzullo, S., & Bresciani, S. (2023). Creating shared value through
open innovation approaches: Opportunities and challenges for corporate sustainability. Business
Strategy and the Environment, https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.3377
Carvalho, A., Levitt, A., Levitt, S., Khaddam, E., & Benamati, J. (2019). Off-the-shelf artificial
intelligence technologies for sentiment and emotion analysis: a tutorial on using IBM natural
34

language processing. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 44,
https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.04443
CNBC (2023). OpenAI CEO Sam Altman says he’s a ‘little bit scared’ of A.I.,
https://www.cnbc.com/2023/03/20/openai-ceo-sam-altman-says-hes-a-little-bit-scared-of-ai.html
Corea, F., Fossa, F., Loreggia, A., Quintarelli, S., & Sapienza, S. (2022). A principle-based
approach to AI: the case for European Union and Italy. AI & Society, 38, 521–535
Crawford, K., & Paglen, T. (2021). Excavating AI: The politics of images in machine learning
training sets. AI & Society, 36(4), 1105-1116.
Damoah, I. S., Ayakwah, A., & Tingbani, I. (2021). Artificial intelligence (AI)-enhanced medical
drones in the healthcare supply chain (HSC) for sustainability development: A case study. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 328, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.129598
Dauvergne, P. (2022). Is artificial intelligence greening global supply chains? Exposing the political
economy of environmental costs. Review of International Political Economy, 29(3), 696-718.
Du, S., El Akremi, A., & Jia, M. (2022). Quantitative Research on Corporate Social Responsibility:
A Quest for Relevance and Rigor in a Quickly Evolving, Turbulent World. Journal of Business
Ethics, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-022-05297-6
Du, S., & Xie, C. (2021). Paradoxes of artificial intelligence in consumer markets: Ethical
challenges and opportunities. Journal of Business Research, 129, 961-974.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, T., ... & Williams, M. D.
(2021). Artificial Intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges,
opportunities, and agenda for research, practice and policy. International Journal of Information
Management, 57, 101994.
Engel, C., Ebel, P., & Leimeister, J. M. (2022). Cognitive automation. Electronic Markets, 32(1),
339-350.
Erdélyi, O.J. & Goldsmith, J. (2022). Regulating Artificial Intelligence: Proposal for a Global
Solution, Government Information Quarterly 39 (4), 1-13.
EU (2021). Regulation of the European Parliament and the council laying down harmonized rules
on artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and amending certain union legislative acts,
European Commission, Brussels, Belgium, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52021PC0206
Filgueiras, F. (2022). New Pythias of public administration: ambiguity and choice in AI systems as
challenges for governance. AI & Society, 37(4), 1473-1486.
Fosch-Villaronga, E., Drukarch, H., Khanna, P., Verhoef, T., & Custers, B. (2022). Accounting for
diversity in AI for medicine. Computer Law & Security Review, 47,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2022.105735
35

Frank, B. (2021). Artificial intelligence-enabled environmental sustainability of products:
Marketing benefits and their variation by consumer, location, and product types. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 285, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125242
Galaz, V., Centeno, M. A., Callahan, P. W., Causevic, A., Patterson, T., Brass, I., ... & Levy, K.
(2021). Artificial intelligence, systemic risks, and sustainability. Technology in Society, 67,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2021.101741
Gehr, T., Mirman, M., Drachsler-Cohen, D., Tsankov, P., Chaudhuri, S., & Vechev, M. (2018).
Ai2: Safety and robustness certification of neural networks with abstract interpretation. In 2018
IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP) (pp. 3-18). IEEE.
Gonzalez, R. A., Ferro, R. E., & Liberona, D. (2020). Government and governance in intelligent
cities, smart transportation study case in Bogotá Colombia. Ain Shams Engineering Journal, 11(1),
25-34.
Hamon, R., Junklewitz, H., & Sanchez, I. (2020). Robustness and explainability of artificial
intelligence. Publications Office of the European Union, Brussels, Belgium.
Hepburn, G. (2009). Alternatives to traditional regulation, Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, Paris, France, https://www.oecd.org/gov/regulatory-policy/42245468.pdf
Hickok, M. (2022). Public procurement of artificial intelligence systems: new risks and future
proofing. AI & Society, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01572-2
Hollanek, T. (2020). AI transparency: a matter of reconciling design with critique. AI & Society,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-01110-y
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2022). AI as customer. Journal of Service Management, 33(2), 210220.
IBM (2022). Introducing IBM AI Governance: IBM AI Governance is a new, one-stop solution
built on IBM Cloud Pak® for Data. Armonk, New York, United States of America,
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/blog/announcements/introducing-ibm-ai-governance
IEEE (2023). IEEE Introduces New Program for Free Access to AI Ethics and Governance
Standards, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, New York, United States of America,
https://standards.ieee.org/news/get-program-ai-ethics/
Janiesch, C., Zschech, P., & Heinrich, K. (2021). Machine learning and deep learning. Electronic
Markets, 31(3), 685-695.
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Singh, R. P., & Suman, R. (2021). Substantial capabilities of robotics in
enhancing industry 4.0 implementation. Cognitive Robotics, 1, 58-75.
John-Mathews, J. M. (2022). Some critical and ethical perspectives on the empirical turn of AI
interpretability. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 174, 121209.
36

John-Mathews, J. M., Cardon, D., & Balagué, C. (2022). From reality to world. A critical
perspective on AI fairness. Journal of Business Ethics, 178(4), 945-959.
Keller, P., & Drake, A. (2021). Exclusivity and Paternalism in the public governance of explainable
AI. Computer Law & Security Review, 40, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2020.105490
Koniakou, V. (2023). From the “rush to ethics” to the “race for governance” in Artificial
Intelligence. Information Systems Frontiers, 25(1), 71-102.
Krkač, K. (2019). Corporate social irresponsibility: humans vs artificial intelligence. Social
Responsibility Journal, 15(6), 786-802.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553), 436-444.
Li, W., Su, Z., Li, R., Zhang, K., & Wang, Y. (2020). Blockchain-based data security for artificial
intelligence applications in 6G networks. IEEE Network, 34(6), 31-37.
Li, G., Li, N., & Sethi, S. P. (2021). Does CSR reduce idiosyncratic risk? Roles of operational
efficiency and AI innovation. Production and Operations Management, 30(7), 2027-2045.
Madaio, M. A., Stark, L., Wortman Vaughan, J., & Wallach, H. (2020). Co-designing checklists to
understand organizational challenges and opportunities around fairness in AI. In Proceedings of the
2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM Digital Library, New
York, USA, and DOI: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3313831.3376445
Mäntymäki, M., Minkkinen, M., Birkstedt, T., & Viljanen, M. (2022). Defining organizational AI
governance. AI and Ethics, 2(4), 603-609.
Magas, M., & Kiritsis, D. (2022). Industry Commons: an ecosystem approach to horizontal enablers
for sustainable cross-domain industrial innovation (a positioning paper). International Journal of
Production Research, 60(2), 479-492.
Magistretti, S., Dell’Era, C., & Petruzzelli, A. M. (2019). How intelligent is Watson? Enabling
digital transformation through artificial intelligence. Business Horizons, 62(6), 819-829.
Matytsin, D. E., Dzedik, V. A., Makeeva, G. A., & Boldyreva, S. B. (2023). “Smart” outsourcing in
support of the humanization of entrepreneurship in the artificial intelligence economy. Humanities
and Social Sciences Communications, 10(1), 1-8.
McBride, R., Dastan, A., & Mehrabinia, P. (2022). How AI affects the future relationship between
corporate governance and financial markets: A note on impact capitalism. Managerial Finance,
48(8), 1240-1249.
Microsoft (2023). Responsible and trusted AI, Redmont, United States of America,
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cloud-adoption-framework/innovate/best-practices/trustedai

37

Minkkinen, M., Niukkanen, A., & Mäntymäki, M. (2022). What about investors? ESG analyses as
tools for ethics-based AI auditing. AI & society, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01415-0
Minkkinen, M., Zimmer, M. P., & Mäntymäki, M. (2023). Co-shaping an ecosystem for responsible
AI: five types of expectation work in response to a Technological Frame. Information Systems
Frontiers, 25(1), 103-121.
Mullins, M., Holland, C. P., & Cunneen, M. (2021). Creating ethics guidelines for artificial
intelligence and big data analytics customers: The case of the consumer European insurance market.
Patterns, 2(10), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100362
Narwani, K., Lin, H., Pirbhulal, S., & Hassan, M. (2022). Towards AI-Enabled Approach for Urdu
Text Recognition: A Legacy for Urdu Image Apprehension. IEEE Access,
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3203426
Ng, K. K., Chen, C. H., Lee, C. K., Jiao, J. R., & Yang, Z. X. (2021). A systematic literature review
on intelligent automation: Aligning concepts from theory, practice, and future perspectives.
Advanced Engineering Informatics, 47, 101246.
OECD (2019). Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence, Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, France,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/oecd-legal-0449
Pai, V., & Chandra, S. (2022). Exploring Factors Influencing Organizational Adoption of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Initiatives. Pacific Asia Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 14(5), 4.
Papagiannidis, E., Enholm, I. M., Dremel, C., Mikalef, P., & Krogstie, J. (2023). Toward AI
governance: Identifying best practices and potential barriers and outcomes. Information Systems
Frontiers, 25(1), 123-141.
Rąb-Kettler, K., & Lehnervp, B. (2019). Recruitment in the times of machine learning.
Management Systems in Production Engineering, 27(2), 105-109.
Raji, I. D., Smart, A., White, R. N., Mitchell, M., Gebru, T., Hutchinson, B., ... & Barnes, P. (2020).
Closing the AI accountability gap: Defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic
auditing. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency (pp.
33-44), ACM Digital Library, New York, USA, https://doi.org/10.1145/3351095.3372873
Raisch, S., & Krakowski, S. (2021). Artificial intelligence and management: The automation–
augmentation paradox. Academy of Management Review, 46(1), 192-210.
Renieris, E.M., Kiron, D., & Mills, S. (2022). Should Organizations Link Responsible AI and
Corporate Social Responsibility? It’s Complicated. MIT Sloan,
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/should-organizations-link-responsible-ai-and-corporate-socialresponsibility-its-complicated/

38

Ribeiro, J., Lima, R., Eckhardt, T., & Paiva, S. (2021). Robotic process automation and artificial
intelligence in industry 4.0–a literature review. Procedia Computer Science, 181, 51-58.
Rodríguez-Barroso, N., Stipcich, G., Jiménez-López, D., Ruiz-Millán, J. A., Martínez-Cámara, E.,
González-Seco, G., ... & Herrera, F. (2020). Federated Learning and Differential Privacy: Software
tools analysis, the Sherpa. ai FL framework and methodological guidelines for preserving data
privacy. Information Fusion, 64, 270-292.
Romao, M., Costa, J., & Costa, C. J. (2019, June). Robotic process automation: A case study in the
banking industry. In 2019 14th Iberian Conference on information systems and technologies
(CISTI) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
Sachan, S., Yang, J. B., Xu, D. L., Benavides, D. E., & Li, Y. (2020). An explainable AI decisionsupport-system to automate loan underwriting. Expert Systems with Applications, 144,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.113100
Sætra, H. S. (2021). A Framework for Evaluating and Disclosing the ESG Related Impacts of AI
with the SDGs. Sustainability, 13(15), 8503.
Saurabh, K., Arora, R., Rani, N., Mishra, D., & Ramkumar, M. (2022). AI led ethical digital
transformation: Framework, research and managerial implications. Journal of Information,
Communication and Ethics in Society, 20(2), 229-256.
Schneider, J., Abraham, R., Meske, C., & Vom Brocke, J. (2022). Artificial intelligence governance
for businesses. Information Systems Management, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2011.10672
Silva, R. L., Canciglieri Junior, O., & Rudek, M. (2022). A road map for planning-deploying
machine vision artifacts in the context of industry 4.0. Journal of Industrial and Production
Engineering, 39(3), 167-180.
Smart Nation (2019). National Artificial Intelligence Strategy: Advancing our smart nation journey.
Smart Nation and Digital Government Office, Singapore,
https://www.smartnation.gov.sg/initiatives/artificial-intelligence/
Smuha, N. A. (2019). The EU approach to ethics guidelines for trustworthy artificial intelligence.
Computer Law Review International, 20(4), 97-106.
Strickland, E. (2019). IBM Watson, heal thyself: How IBM overpromised and underdelivered on AI
health care. IEEE Spectrum, 56(4), 24-31.
Thorp, H. H. (2023). ChatGPT is fun, but not an author. Science, 379(6630), 313-313.
Troise, C., & Camilleri, M. A. (2021). The use of digital media for marketing, CSR communication
and stakeholder engagement. In Strategic corporate communication in the digital age. Emerald
Publishing Limited, Bingley, United Kingdom.

39

Wamba-Taguimdje, S. L., Fosso Wamba, S., Kala Kamdjoug, J. R., & Tchatchouang Wanko, C. E.
(2020). Influence of artificial intelligence (AI) on firm performance: the business value of AI-based
transformation projects. Business Process Management Journal, 26(7), 1893-1924.
Watts, J., & Adriano, A. (2021). Uncovering the sources of machine-learning mistakes in
advertising: Contextual bias in the evaluation of semantic relatedness. Journal of Advertising,
50(1), 26-38.
Weber, M., Beutter, M., Weking, J., Böhm, M., & Krcmar, H. (2022). AI Startup Business Models:
Key Characteristics and Directions for Entrepreneurship Research. Business & Information
Systems Engineering, 64(1), 91-109.
WhiteHouse (2022). Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights: Making automated systems work for the
American people. The White House Washington DC, United States of America,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/ai-bill-of-rights/
Wong, P. H. (2020). Cultural differences as excuses? Human rights and cultural values in global
ethics and governance of AI. Philosophy & Technology, 33(4), 705-715.
Wu, W., Huang, T., & Gong, K. (2020). Ethical principles and governance technology development
of AI in China. Engineering, 6(3), 302-309.
Wu, L., Dodoo, N. A., Wen, T. J., & Ke, L. (2022). Understanding Twitter conversations about
artificial intelligence in advertising based on natural language processing. International Journal of
Advertising, 41(4), 685-702.
Zhang, B., Zhu, J., & Su, H. (2023). Toward the third generation artificial intelligence. Science
China Information Sciences, 66(2), 1-19.
Zhang, C., & Lu, Y. (2021). Study on artificial intelligence: The state of the art and future
prospects. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 23,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100224
Zhu, T., Ye, D., Wang, W., Zhou, W., & Philip, S. Y. (2020). More than privacy: Applying
differential privacy in key areas of artificial intelligence. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, 34(6), 2824-2843.

40

