THE CHINESE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG
FACULTY OF LAW
Research Paper No. 2019-15

Artificial Intelligence Governance and Ethics: Global
Perspectives

Angela Daly
Thilo Hagendorff
Li Hui
Monique Mann
Vidushi Marda
Ben Wagner
Wei Wang
Saskia Witteborn

This report is supported by Angela Daly’s Chinese University of Hong Kong 2018-2019 Direct Grant for
Research 2018-2019 ‘Governing the Future: How are Major Jurisdictions Tackling the Issue of Artificial
Intelligence, Law and Ethics?’.

Released under a Creative Commons CC BY-ND Attribution-NoDerivs licence.

The authors acknowledge the research assistance of Ms Jing Bei and Mr Sunny Ka Long Chan, and the
comments and observations from participants in the CUHK Law Global Governance of AI and Ethics
workshop, 20-21 June 2019.

Table of Contents
Author biographies ................................................................................................................................. 4
1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................................ 6
What is AI? ......................................................................................................................................... 6
AI and Ethics ...................................................................................................................................... 7
What does ‘ethics’ mean in AI? .......................................................................................................... 7
This Report ......................................................................................................................................... 8
2. Global Level ..................................................................................................................................... 10
International organisations ............................................................................................................... 10
Technical initiatives .......................................................................................................................... 11
Global multistakeholder initiatives .................................................................................................... 11
3. Europe .............................................................................................................................................. 12
European Union................................................................................................................................ 12
Council of Europe ............................................................................................................................. 14
Germany ........................................................................................................................................... 14
Austria............................................................................................................................................... 15
United Kingdom ................................................................................................................................ 16
4. India.................................................................................................................................................. 19
5. China ................................................................................................................................................ 20
AI in Hong Kong ............................................................................................................................... 21
5. United States of America ................................................................................................................. 23
6. Australia ........................................................................................................................................... 26
Principles for Australia’s AI Ethical Framework ............................................................................... 27
7. Reflections, issues and next steps .................................................................................................. 28
1. Have and have-nots ..................................................................................................................... 28
2. Competition vs collaboration ........................................................................................................ 28
3. Similarities and differences .......................................................................................................... 29
4. What’s not included? .................................................................................................................... 29
5. What’s already there? .................................................................................................................. 30
6. Implementation and enforceability ............................................................................................... 30
7. Who is involved? .......................................................................................................................... 31
References ........................................................................................................................................... 33
Further Resources ............................................................................................................................... 40

Author biographies
Angela Daly, PhD, is a socio-legal scholar working on transnational regulation of new (digital)
technologies. She is the author of Socio-Legal Aspects of the 3D Printing Revolution (Palgrave 2016) and
Private Power, Online Information Flows and EU Law: Mind the Gap (Hart 2016) and co-editor of Good
Data (Institute of Network Cultures 2019). She holds a PhD in Law from the European University
Institute, is currently based at the Chinese University of Hong Kong Faculty of Law, and will join
Strathclyde University Law School (Scotland) as Senior Lecturer (Associate Professor) in September 2019.
She holds visiting and adjunct positions at Queensland University of Technology (Australia), Tilburg
University (Netherlands) and University of Macerata (Italy).

Thilo Hagendorff, PhD, is a media and technology ethicist. He received his doctorate in 2013 with a
sociological thesis. He has been a research associate at the International Center for Ethics in the
Sciences and Humanities (IZEW) at the University of Tuebingen (Germany) since 2013. Since 2019 he is
working in the ‘Machine Learning: New Perspectives for Science’ Excellence Cluster. Furthermore, he is a
lecturer at the University of Tuebingen as well as at the Hasso-Plattner-Institute of the University of
Potsdam (Germany).

Li Hui, PhD, is an associate research fellow at the Shanghai Institute for Science of Science (China). He
received his doctorate majoring in history of science in 2011 from Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
including two years of joint training in the University of Pennsylvania (2008-2010). His research focus is
on new scientific and technological revolutions, and industrial transformation, especially the social
impact and governance of AI. He regularly participates in the formulation of Chinese government
strategies and plans on AI.

Monique Mann, PhD, is the Vice Chancellor’s Research Fellow in Technology and Regulation at the
Faculty of Law Queensland University of Technology (Australia). She is an Adjunct Researcher with the
Law, Science, Technology and Society (LSTS) Research Centre at Vrije Universiteit Brussel (Belgium). Dr
Mann is advancing a programme of socio-legal research on the intersecting topics of algorithmic justice,
police technology, surveillance, and transnational online policing. She is author of Politicising and
Policing Organised Crime (Routledge 2019), co-author of Biometrics, Crime and Security (Routledge
2018), and co-editor of Good Data (Institute of Network Cultures 2019). She is on the Board of Directors
of the Australian Privacy Foundation where she Chairs the Surveillance Committee.

Vidushi Marda is a lawyer based in Bangalore (India). She leads ARTICLE 19’s global research and
engagement on artificial intelligence and human rights, and also works on strengthening human rights
considerations in internet infrastructure. She is currently studying the impact of machine learning
systems on the exercise of rights in Asia. Vidushi has produced case studies on the use of big data in
governance in the global south, and has worked on understanding data flows within India’s biometric
identity project, Aadhaar. Her research has been cited by the Supreme Court of India in its seminal
ruling on the right to privacy in 2017, the UK House of Lords Select Committee on AI and the UN Special
Rapporteur on the right to freedom of opinion and expression. Vidushi is additionally a non-resident
analyst on AI and rights with Carnegie India.

Ben Wagner, PhD, is an Assistant Professor and Director of the Privacy & Sustainable Computing Lab at
Vienna University of Economics and Business (Austria). He previously worked at the Technical University
of Berlin, European University Viadrina and the University of Pennsylvania. He is part of the Privacy &
Usability training network and a member of the ENISA PSG advisory board. His research focuses on
technology, human rights and accountable information systems. Ben holds a PhD in Political and Social
Sciences from European University Institute in Florence (Italy).

Saskia Witteborn, PhD, is Associate Professor in the School of Journalism and Communication at the
Chinese University of Hong Kong. She received her PhD from the University of Washington (US) and
specializes in transnational migration and technologies. Saskia has worked with migrant groups in North
America, Europe, and Asia and has strong expertise in forced migration, with contributions to the
political economy of mobility and space, digital heterotopia, emotions, and grouping processes. Her
work has appeared in journals such as the Journal of Communication, Cultural Studies, and the Journal of
Refugee Studies as well as in edited collections. As Associate Director of the Research Centre on
Migration and Mobility at CUHK, Saskia is generally interested in culturally grounded approaches to
communicative action around agendas for change.

Wei Wang is a PhD candidate at the University of Hong Kong Faculty of Law. His research interests
include IP & IT Law, Innovation & Competition Policy, particularly by means of computational legal
studies. He engages as an Administrative Officer for the Creative Commons Hong Kong Chapter, of which
he was also among the founding members. Prior to his PhD studies, Wei worked as Data Analyst of IP
litigations in Shenzhen and Research Associate with a focus on AI and Copyright at Law and Technology
Centre, HKU. Wei recently completed the WIPO/QUT LLM in Intellectual Property with a Dean's
Scholarship. He also holds BEng, LLB and MPhil from Huazhong University of Science and Technology
(China), with the support of the Research Center for the Judicial Protection of Intellectual Property
approved by the Supreme People’s Court of P.R.China. Wei is now a Member of the International
Association of Artificial Intelligence and Law, Asian Privacy Scholars Network and Creative Commons
Global Network.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a technology which is increasingly being utilised in society and the economy
worldwide, and its implementation is planned to become more prevalent in coming years. AI is
increasingly being embedded in our lives, supplementing our pervasive use of digital technologies. But
this is being accompanied by disquiet over problematic and dangerous implementations of AI, or indeed,
even AI itself deciding to do dangerous and problematic actions, especially in fields such as the military,
medicine and criminal justice. These developments have led to concerns about whether and how AI
systems adhere, and will adhere to ethical standards. These concerns have stimulated a global
conversation on AI ethics, and have resulted in various actors from different countries and sectors
issuing ethics and governance initiatives and guidelines for AI. Such developments form the basis for our
research in this report, combining our international and interdisciplinary expertise to give an insight into
what is happening in Australia, China, Europe, India and the US.

What is AI?
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is an emerging area of computer science. There are numerous definitions and
various terms used interchangeably to describe ‘AI’ within the academic literature (and also popular
discourse) - these include, for example: algorithmic/profiling, automation, (supervised/unsupervised)
machine learning, deep neural networks etc.

In general terms, AI could be defined as technology that automatically detects patterns in data, and
makes predictions on the basis of them. It is a method of inferential analysis that identifies correlations
within datasets that can, in the case of profiling, be used as an indicator to classify a subject as a
representative of a category or group (Hildebrandt 2008; Schreurs et al 2008). A broad distinction is
made between ‘narrow’ and ‘general’ or ‘broad’ AI. Narrow AI is an AI application which is designed to
deal with one particular task and reflects most currently existing applications of AI in daily life, while
general or broad AI reflects human intelligence in its versatility to handle different or general tasks. In
this report when we discuss AI we refer to AI in its narrow form.

There are numerous applications of AI in a range of domains, perhaps contributing to definitional
complexity, for example, predictive analytics (such as recidivism prediction in criminal justice contexts,
predictive policing, forecasting risk in business and finance), automated identification via facial
recognition etc. Indeed, AI has been deployed in a range of contexts and social domains, with mixed
outcomes, including insurance, finance, education, employment, marketing, governance, security, and
policing (see e.g., O’Neil 2016; Ferguson 2017).

AI and Ethics

At this relatively early stage in AI’s development and implementation, the issue has arisen of AI adhering
to certain ethical principles (see e.g. Arkin 2009; Mason 2017), and the ability of existing laws to govern
AI has emerged as key as to how future AI will be developed, deployed and implemented (see e.g.
Leenes & Lucivero 2015; Calo 2015; Wachter et al. 2017a).

While originally confined to theoretical, technical and academic debates, the issue of governing AI has
recently entered the mainstream with both governments and private companies from major geopolitical
powers including the US, China, European Union and India formulating statements and policies
regarding AI and ethics (see e.g. European Commission 2018; Pichai 2018).

A key issue here is precisely what are the ethical standards to which AI should adhere? Furthermore, the
transnational nature of digitised technologies, the key role of private corporations in AI development
and implementation and the globalised economy gives rise to questions about which jurisdictions/actors
will decide on the legal and ethical standards to which AI may adhere, and whether we may end up with
a ‘might is right’ approach where it is these large geopolitical players which set the agenda for AI
regulation and ethics for the whole world.

Further questions arise around the enforceability of ethics statements regarding AI, both in terms of
whether they reflect existing fundamental legal principles and are legally enforceable in specific
jurisdictions, and also the extent to which the principles can be operationalised and integrated into AI
systems and application in practice.

What does ‘ethics’ mean in AI?

Ethics is seen as a reflection theory of morality or as the theory of the good life. A distinction can be
made between fundamental ethics, which is concerned with abstract moral principles, and applied
ethics (Höffe 2013). The latter also includes ethics of technology, which contains in turn AI ethics as a
subcategory. Roughly speaking, AI ethics serves for the self-reflection of computer and engineering
sciences, which are engaged in the research and development of AI or machine learning. In this context,
dynamics such as individual technology development projects, or the development of new technologies
as a whole, can be analyzed. Likewise, causal mechanisms and functions of certain technologies can be
investigated using a more static analysis (Rahwan et al. 2019). Typical topics are self-driving cars,
political manipulation by AI applications, autonomous weapon systems, facial recognition, algorithmic

discrimination, conversational bots, social sorting by ranking algorithms, and many more (Hagendorff
2019).

Key demands of AI ethics relate to aspects such as the reflection of research goals and purposes, the
direction of research funding, the linkage between science and politics, the security of AI systems, the
responsibility links underlying the development and use of AI technologies, the inscription of values in
technical artefacts, the orientation of the technology sector towards the common good, and much more
(Future of Life Institute 2017).

Last but not least, AI ethics is also reflected within the framework of metaethics, in which questions
about the effectiveness of normative demands are investigated. Ethical discourses can either be held
with close proximity to their designated object, or it can be the opposite. The advantage of a close
proximity is that those ethical discourses can have a concrete impact on the course of action in a
particular organization dealing with AI. The downside is that this kind of ethical reflection has to be quite
narrow and pragmatic. Uttering more radical demands only makes only sense when ethical discourses
have a certain distance to their designated object. Nevertheless, those ethical discourses are typically
rather inefficient and have hardly any effect in practice.

Another dimension of AI ethics concerns the degree of its normativity. Here, ethics can oscillate
between irritation and orientation. Irritation equals weak normativity. This means an abstinence from
strong normative claims. Instead, ethics just uncovers blind spots or describes hitherto
underrepresented issues. Orientation, on the other hand, means strong normativity. The downside of
making strong normative claims is that they provoke backfire- or boomerang-effects, meaning that
people tend to react to perceived external constraints on action with that kind of behaviour they are
supposed to refrain from.

Therefore, AI ethics must satisfy two traits in order to be effective. First, it should use weak normativity
and should not universally determine what is right and what is wrong. Second, AI ethics should seek
close proximity to its designated object. This implies that ethics is understood as an inter- or
transdisciplinary field of study, that is directly linked to the adjacent computer sciences or industry
organizations, and that is active within these fields.

This Report
In this Report we combine our interdisciplinary and international expertise as researchers working on AI
policy, ethics and governance to give an overview of some of our countries and regions’ approaches to

the topic of AI and ethics. We do not claim to present an exhaustive account of approaches to this issue
internationally, but we do aim to give a snapshot of how some countries and regions, especially ‘large’
ones like China, Europe, India and the United States are, or are not, addressing the topic. We also
include some initiatives at national level of EU Member States (Germany, Austria and the United
Kingdom) and initiatives in Australia, all of which can be considered ‘smaller’. The selection of these
countries and regions has been driven by our own familiarity with them from prior experience.

We acknowledge the limitations of our approach, that we do not have contributions regarding this issue
from Africa, Latin America, the Middle East, Russia, Indigenous views of AI and AI and ethics approaches
informed by religious beliefs (see e.g. Cisse 2018; ELRC 2019; Indigenous AI n.d.). In future work we hope
to be able to cover more countries and approaches to AI ethics.

We have specifically looked to government, corporate and some other initiatives which frame and
situate themselves in the realm of ‘AI governance’ or ‘AI ethics’. We acknowledge that other initiatives,
such as those relevant to ‘big data’ and the ‘Internet of Things’ may also be relevant to AI governance
and ethics; but with a few exceptions, these are beyond the scope of this report. Further work should be
done on ‘connecting the dots’ between some predecessor digital technology governance initiatives and
the current drive for AI ethics and governance.

The fast-moving nature of this topic and field is our reason for publishing this report in this current form.
We hope the report is useful and illuminating for readers.

We welcome comments and other feedback on the work to date, and expressions of interest in future
collaboration with us on this and related topics.

Please send any feedback to angelacdalyATgmail.com.

2. Global Level
International organisations
At the international level, the most prominent AI ethics guidelines are the recently-released OECD
Principles on AI (2019). The OECD is an international economic organisation of 36 Member States,
mostly comprising high-income economies. The Principles have been endorsed by, among others, the US
Trump Administration (Pressman & Lashinsky 2019), and six non-member states (Argentina, Brazil,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Peru and Romania). In June 2019 ministers from the Group of 20 (G20) major
economies agreed on a set of guiding principles for using AI, which are derived from the aforementioned
OECD Principles, but are also characterised as non-binding (G20 2019). Notably, China and Russia are
G20 countries but not OECD members (Koizumi 2019).

There are various activities that the United Nations (UN) and its constituent bodies is undertaking which
relate to AI (ITU 2018). While at the time of writing the UN and its constituent bodies have not issued
their own ethics or governance principles on AI, UNICEF and the United Nations Development Program
(UNDP) are members of the multistakeholder Partnership on AI (discussed below). UNESCO is also
working on a possible ‘normative instrument’ on the topic (ITU 2018). The United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute is in the process of opening a Centre for Artificial Intelligence and
Robotics in The Hague, Netherlands. An attempt in 2018 to open formal negotiations to reform the UN
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons to govern or prohibit fully autonomous lethal weapons
were blocked by the US and Russia, among others (Delcker 2018).

The Council of Europe has also been active on the topic of AI. These developments are included in the
next section on Europe.

At the 40th International Conference of Data Protection & Privacy Commissioners (ICDPPC) in 2018,
which took place in Brussels, a Declaration on Ethics and Data Protection in Artificial Intelligence was
released by delegates from various national data protection and privacy authorities. The Declaration
sets out six guiding principles and calls for ‘common governance principles on artificial intelligence’ to be
established. The ICDPPC has also set up a permanent working group on Ethics and Data Protection in
Artificial Intelligence.

Technical initiatives

The most prominent initiative from the technical community can be found in the IEEE’s work on AI, in
the form of its Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems. The IEEE (Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers) has involved its membership of technical experts, but also reached
beyond to non-IEEE members to participate in this project. The initiative has produced two versions to
date of Ethically Aligned Design, involving ‘hundreds of participants over six continents’ (IEEE 2018).
Version 2 includes five General Principles to guide the ethical design, development and implementation
of autonomous and intelligent systems. In line with IEEE’s general activities, the development of
technical standards based on these discussions on ethics is envisaged by the Global Initiative, and a
series of working groups have been set up under the Global Initiative to work towards this goal.

Global multistakeholder initiatives
Some multinational corporations have also released their own ethics statements. Since many of these
corporations originate in the US, they are included later in the section on the US. There is one group
which may be considered truly global, and also multistakeholder in its membership, namely the
Partnership on AI. As mentioned, some UN agencies are among its members, as well as NGOs (such as
Article 19), academic research institutes (such as the Australian National University 3Ai Centre), public
sector agencies (including the BBC) and also technology firms such as Amazon but also Chinese giant
Baidu. The Partnership on AI has released its 8 ‘Tenets’ (Partnership on AI n.d.).

The World Economic Forum, funded by its member corporations from around the world, has
commenced various activities on AI, principally through its Center for the Fourth Industrial Revolution in
San Francisco (US). Part of this Center’s work is to co-design and pilot policy and governance
frameworks including for AI with governments and corporations. In 2019 the WEF released a White
Paper on the topic of AI governance.

3. Europe
In this section some AI governance and ethics initiatives which have been developed in Europe will be
outlined. These include developments by the European Union (EU), Council of Europe (CoE) and in some
individual nations (which happen to be members of both the EU and CoE).

European Union
The EU has been positioning itself as a frontrunner in the global debate on AI governance and ethics. A
major piece of legislation, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) came into effect in 2018, and
has a scope which extends to some organisations outside of the EU in certain circumstances. Of direct
interest for AI governance are the provisions contained in Section 5 of the GDPR on the Right to Object
(Article 21) and Automated Individual Decision-Making Including Profiling (Article 22). There is
significant discussion as to precisely what these provisions entail in practice regarding algorithmic
decision-making, automation and profiling and whether they are adequate to address the concerns that
arise from such processes (see e.g. Edwards & Veale 2017; Wachter, Mittelstadt & Floridi 2017b).

Among other prominent developments in the EU is the European Parliament Resolution on Civil Law
Rules on Robotics from February 2017. While the Resolution is not binding, it expresses the Parliament’s
opinion, and makes various requests of the European Commission to carry out further work on the topic.
In particular, the Resolution ‘consider[ed] that the existing Union legal framework should be updated
and complemented, where appropriate, by guiding ethical principles in line with the complexity of
robotics and its many social, medical and bioethical implications’ and set out in its Annex a proposed
Code of Ethical Conduct for Robotics Engineers, Code for Research Ethics Committees, Licence for
Designers and Licence for Users. The Parliament also requested the European Commission to submit a
‘proposal for a legislative instrument on legal questions related to the development and use of robotics
and AI foreseeable in the next 10 to 15 years, combined with non-legislative instruments such as
guidelines and codes of conduct as referred to in recommendations set out in the Annex’. At the time of
writing, the Commission has not yet released such a proposal.

Further initiatives have occurred subsequent to this European Parliament Resolution. In March 2018,
the European Commission issued a Communication on Artificial Intelligence for Europe, in which the
Commission set out ‘a European initiative on AI’ with three main aims: of boosting the EU’s
technological and industrial capacity, and AI uptake; of preparing for socio-economic changes brought
about by AI (with a focus on labour, social security and education); and of ensuring ‘an appropriate
ethical and legal framework, based on the Union’s values and in line with the Charter of Fundamental
Rights of the EU’.

Also in March 2018, the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies, an independent
advisory body to the President of the European Commission comprising interdisciplinary experts,
released its Statement on Artificial Intelligence, Robotics and Autonomous Systems. The Statement
proposed ‘a set of basic principles and democratic prerequisites, based on the fundamental values laid
down in the EU Treaties and in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights’.

Most prominent of the EU initiatives has been the European Union High-Level Expert Group on Artificial
Intelligence (a multi-stakeholder group of 52 experts from academia, civil society and industry) finalising
its Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI in April 2019 (2019a). They include 7 key, but non-exhaustive,
requirements that AI systems should meet in order to be ‘trustworthy’. The requirements will go
through a ‘piloting process’ whereby they will be tested in private and public sector organisation, with
feedback sought to inform a public document scheduled for release in early 2020.

A member of the High-Level Expert Group, Thomas Metzinger, criticised the process and output as
‘ethics washing’ in an op-ed for German newspaper Der Tagesspeigel in 2019. In particular he pointed to
the removal of ‘red line’ ‘non-negotiable’ text from the final version of the Guidelines as an example of
this, and called for academia and civil society to take charge of the discussion on AI governance and
ethics, especially away from industry. Nevertheless, Metzinger still considers that the ethics guidelines
produced by the Group are ‘the best in the world’ especially as compared to efforts from the US and
China.

This ‘first deliverable’ of the High-Level Expert Group was followed by their ‘second deliverable’, Policy
and Investment Recommendations for Trustworthy AI in June 2019 (2019b). The document contains 33
recommendations ‘that can guide Trustworthy AI towards sustainability, growth and competitiveness, as
well as inclusion – while empowering, benefiting and protecting human beings’. Among the
recommendations, along with ones pertaining to education, research, government use of AI and
investment priorities, is strong criticism of both state and corporate surveillance using AI, including that
governments should commit not to engage in mass surveillance and the commercial surveillance of
individuals including via ‘free’ services should be countered. This is furthered by a specific
recommendation that AI-enabled ‘mass scoring’ of individuals be banned. The Panel also recommends
that sustainability be taken account of, including the enactment of a circular economy plan for digital
technologies and AI. The Panel calls for more work to be done to assess existing legal and regulatory
frameworks to discern whether they are adequate to address the Panel’s recommendations or whether
reform is necessary in order to do so, with particular regard being paid to: the monitoring and restriction
of automated lethal weapons; the monitoring of personalised AI systems built on children’s profiles; and

the monitoring of AI systems used in the private sector which significantly impact on human lives, with
the possibility of introducing further obligations on such providers.

The language of ‘red lines’ is included in this document, and as mentioned above, the Panel expresses
concern with some particular uses of AI, including examples it believes should be prohibited. This may
stymie some of the previous criticism regarding the Guidelines being ‘ethics washing’ but it is still
significant that that language was excluded from the Guidelines even if it has ended up in the
Recommendations. Furthermore, it is unclear to what extent the Panel’s Recommendations will actually
be followed by EU institutions and put into practice in reality.

Council of Europe
The Council of Europe (CoE), which includes all EU Member States as well as additional non-EU members
in eastern Europe, Turkey and Russia, has also been active on the topic of AI.

Of these activities, there are two which directly relate to AI governance and ethics. The first is the
European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ) European Ethical Charter on the use of
artificial intelligence (AI) in judicial systems and their environment, adopted in December 2018, which
contains five principles to guide the development of AI tools in European judiciaries. The European
Committee on Legal Co-operation (CDCJ) is at the time of writing working on draft guidelines for
policymakers designing online dispute resolution systems (ODRs) to ensure compatibility with the right
to a fair trial and the right to an effective remedy under the European Convention on Human Rights.
These guidelines are projected to be released in late 2020.

The second notable CoE activity is the Guidelines on Artificial Intelligence and Data Protection published
by the Consultative Committee of the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to
Automatic Processing of Personal Data (Convention 108) in January 2019. This follows Guidelines on Big
Data issued in 2017, and the modernisation of Convention 108 which included additions to address
algorithmic decision-making. Convention 108 includes among its signatories some non-CoE members
including Mauritius, Mexico and Senegal.

Germany

As a consequence of the significant financial support Germany is giving to AI research, a national ‘AI
Strategy’ has been published (Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung et al 2018). The aims of the
initiative are to strengthen Germany as a research location and to support the domestic economy. Just
to give one example, between Tuebingen and Stuttgart the so-called ‘Cyber Valley’ is supposed to

become one of the world's leading research locations for AI as a ‘key technology’. The state government,
companies, universities and other research institutions are cooperating in this project. The high
monetary expenditure for AI research – the Federal Government will spend €500 million as a first step
and €3 billion altogether – is justified almost exclusively with reference to the aim of survival in
international competition or at least not wanting to fall behind, especially the US and China. According
to the strategy, Germany is to become one of the ‘world’s leading locations for AI’.

Within the competitive relationships with other countries, Germany – in accordance with the principles
of the EU Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (Pekka et al 2018) – intends to position itself in such a way
that it sets itself apart from other, non-European nations through data protection-friendly, trustworthy,
and ‘human centered’ AI systems, which are supposed to be used for the common good as well as for
‘lighthouse applications’ in the fields of climate and environment protection. At the centre of these
claims is the establishment of the ‘Artificial Intelligence Made in Germany’ brand, which is supposed to
become a globally acknowledged label of quality.

Part of this ‘brand’ is the idea that AI applications made in Germany, or, to be more precise, the datasets
these AI applications use, stand under the umbrella of data sovereignty, informational selfdetermination and data safety. Moreover, to ensure that AI research and innovation is in line with
ethical and legal standards a Data Ethics Commission was founded, which is able to recommendations to
the Federal Government and to give advice on how to use AI in an ethically sound manner. The crucial
question, however, is whether the tenets of AI ethics are implemented into practice effectively.

The federal government's strategy is to create one hundred new professorships in AI and Machine
Learning. A total of twelve agglomerations for research and innovation are to be established. It is hoped
that this will attract excellent researchers from abroad. Furthermore, it is intended that close
cooperation with France will result in competitive advantages in research and industry. In addition,
there is a special focus on the promotion of medium-sized enterprises. Further fields of action include
the promotion of procedures to facilitate the auditing and interpretability of algorithmic prediction and
decision-making systems as well as AI safety. Overall, it can be stated that Germany has a clear national
‘roadmap’ for the promotion and use of AI technologies.

Austria
AI is viewed in Austria as offering a considerable competitive advantage to the nation. Drafting on an
‘Artificial Intelligence Mission Austria 2030’ was started, which has included a long list of stakeholder
meetings to ensure participation of all relevant actors. While both participation methods used and
stakeholder selection have not always been ideal, the initiative does represent at least an attempt to co-

develop an Austrian AI strategy with hundreds of stakeholders. Its focus on the year 2030 is also
evidently modelled on China’s New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan 2030 strategy,
and like many similar European initiatives can be seen in response to China’s position in the race to
dominate the field of AI.

Austria has also shown a strong interest in European collaboration in this area, attempting to ensure
that a frequently debated European ‘Algorithms Rating Agency’ or ‘AI Ethics Authority’ - modelled on
the IAEA that is being currently being discussed in European policy circles - is eventually located in
Vienna. Austria is the seat of numerous relevant international organisations such as the UN bodies,
OSCE or the IAEA and sees such an authority as a natural continuation of its existing role in this area.

At the same time members of the Austrian government have openly expressed interest in creating a
large national data pool, whereby Austrian citizens’ data would be sold to the highest bidder in order to
attract cutting edge data-driven research to Austria. Despite evident conflict with the GDPR and other
existing data protection rules, this idea remains popular in relevant policy circles. It all stems from the
acknowledgement that Austria knows that it is a small country and thus cannot compete at a global level
in all domains. The data-pooling strategy is thus seen as a key competitive advantage to ensure that
Austria is able to compete in a competitive international environment as a small country.

Due to the disintegration of the Austrian government as part of the ‘Ibiza scandal’ in May 2019 involving a video featuring political bribes, a table of what looks like cocaine and attacks on political
attacks on leading Austrian newspapers by the far right-wing FPÖ party - it is unclear how and even
whether the Artificial Intelligence Mission Austria 2030 will continue. However, it is to be assumed that
some version of this strategy will be implemented in the coming years, regardless of which government
is in power.

United Kingdom
The UK Government has linked AI development directly to its industrial strategy, and also seems to view
this as giving the UK a potential competitive edge, particularly in the current context of the UK leaving
the EU, or ‘Brexit’, and uncertainty as to what kind of political, economic and social future may lie for
the UK subsequent to this point.

In its 2017 Industrial Strategy, the UK Government identified ‘putting the UK at the forefront of the
artificial intelligence and data revolution’ as one of four ‘Grand Challenges’ for the country, adding that
it would invest in business, research and education in the UK to meet the challenge, including an AI

Sector Deal which was commenced in 2018. The UK government also proclaimed its vision that the UK
‘will lead the world in safe and ethical use of data and artificial intelligence giving confidence and clarity
to citizens and business’, including by setting up a Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation as an advisory
body to this effect in what the Government claims is a ‘world first’ (although this seems very similar to
Germany’s approach detailed above). The Centre has since been set up but has not produced any
substantive outputs at the time of writing. As regards international governance, the Government
asserted in its Industrial Strategy that it would be an ‘active participant’ in standard setting and
regulatory bodies especially for AI and data protection.

The UK Parliament has also been active in its consideration of AI governance and ethics issues. An AllParty Parliamentary Group on AI was set up in 2017; and a Select Committee on AI was also formed to
investigate the topic, seek input from interested stakeholders and then issued a report in 2018. The
Select Committee’s report (re)asserted the UK’s place among the ‘best countries in the world for
researchers and businesses developing AI’ but acknowledged that the UK may be unable to compete
with the size of investments in AI being made by China and the US - although it could find better
comparisons in the form of Canada and Germany. The UK could draw on what was perceived as its
existing strengths and position itself as a leader in the ethical development of AI. The Select Committee
did not consider that it was necessary to introduce AI-specific regulation at this point in time, but
advocated for further work to be done assessing whether additions to existing legal and regulatory
frameworks to deal with AI may be necessary in the future. The Select Committee did advance 5 nonlegally binding ‘overarching principles’, as the basis for a possible cross-sector ‘AI Code’ that it suggested
be formulated and developed by the Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation. Finally of relevance here is
the Select Committee’s recommendation to the UK Government to convene a ‘global summit’ by the
end of 2019 involving different stakeholder groups to ‘develop a common framework for the ethical
development and deployment of artificial intelligence systems’ which ‘should be aligned with existing
international governance structures’. It is unclear whether such an event will indeed be organised by the
end of 2019.

In addition, the UK Government was the first government to partner with the World Economic Forum’s
aforementioned Center for the Fourth Industrial Revolution in its project to co-design guidelines for the
public procurement of AI products and services for public sector uses (Russo 2018). At the time of
writing, this work is underway, but no outputs have yet been produced.

Clouding the picture for the UK, in AI and other matters, is its pending departure from the European
Union and the uncertainty about what the post-EU future holds for the country. The UK Government’s
activities in this area have been criticised by some stakeholder groups for not investing enough
compared to other Western European countries and also making ‘wrong’ investments (Walker 2018). In
addition, EU investment in AI and robotics will likely be no longer available for research and

development in the UK, which to date has been a major recipient of these funds (Walker 2018). The EU
also seems to be forging ahead of domestic UK initiatives regarding ethical AI development, which also
may call into question how successful the desire to be a world leader, especially in ethical AI
development, will be for the UK in a post-Brexit future.

4. India
India’s approach to AI is substantially informed by three initiatives at the national level. The first is
Digital India, which aims to make India a digitally empowered knowledge economy. The second is Make
in India, under which the Government of India is prioritising AI technology designed and developed in
India, and the third is the Smart Cities Mission (Marda 2018).

Alongside this, there is significant investment towards research, development and training in emerging
technologies in particular from the Union Government. An AI Task Force constituted by the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry in 2017 looked at AI as a socio-economic problem solver at scale. In its Report
(Government of India Ministry of Commerce and Industry 2018) it identified 10 key sectors in which AI
should be deployed, including national security, financial technology, manufacturing and agriculture,
among others. Similarly, a National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence was published in 2018 (Niti Aayog
2018) that went further to look at AI as a lever for economic growth, social development, and considers
India as a potential ‘garage’ for AI applications. While ethics are mentioned in both documents, they fail
to meaningfully engage with issues of fundamental rights, fairness, inclusion, and the limits of datadriven decision making. These are also heavily influenced by the private sector, with civil society and
academia, rarely, if ever, being invited into these discussions.

AI is being used in various sectors by private actors - from manufacturing, to healthcare, to finance.
Notwithstanding encouraging developments, the current absence of data protection legislation in India
raises crucial questions for how sensitive personal data is currently processed and shared. The current
Personal Data Protection bill also fails to adequately engage with the question of inferred data, which is
particularly important in the context of machine learning. India’s biometric identity project, Aadhaar,
could also potentially become a central point of AI applications in the future, with a few proposals for
use of facial recognition in the last year, although that is not the case currently.

There is no ethical framework or principles published by the Government at the time of writing. It is
likely that ethical principles will emerge shortly, following public attention on data protection law.
Current references to AI are often in the context of data protection law, which is an increasing trend
across jurisdictions.

5. China
Along with the EU, of the ‘large jurisdictions’ under consideration in this paper, China is the other one
which has generated the most state-supported or -led AI governance and ethics initiatives.

In 2017 China’s State Council issued The New-Generation AI Development Plan, which advanced China’s
objective of high investment in the AI sector in the coming years, and aim of becoming the world leader
in AI innovation (FLIA 2017). An interim goal, by 2025, is to formulate new laws and regulations, and
ethical norms and policies related to AI development in China. This includes participation in
international standard setting, or even ‘taking the lead’ in such activities as well as ‘deepen[ing]
international cooperation in AI laws and regulations’.

Subsequent to this has been further initiatives on AI ethics and governance. In May 2019, the Beijing AI
Principles were released by the Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, which depicted the core of its
AI development as ‘the realization of beneficial AI for humankind and nature’. In addition, the Principles
considered:
●

the risk of human unemployment by encouraging more research on Human-AI coordination;

●

avoiding the negative implications of ‘malicious AI race’ by promoting cooperation, also on a
global level;

●

integrating AI policy with its rapid development in a dynamic and responsive way by making
special guidelines across sectors; and

●

continuously making preventive and forecasting policy in a long-term perspective with respect
to risks posed by Augmented Intelligence, Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) and
Superintelligence.

The Principles have been supported by various elite Chinese universities and companies including Baidu,
Alibaba and Tencent.

Another group comprising top Chinese universities and companies and led by the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technology (MIIT)'s China Academy of Information and Communications Technology,
the Artificial Intelligence Industry Alliance (AIIA), released its Joint Pledge on Self Discipline in the
Artificial Intelligence Industry, also in May 2019 (Webster 2019). The Joint Pledge is, at the time of
writing, open for comments from AIIA members and the general public until the end of June 2019
(Webster 2019). While the wording is fairly generic when compared to other ethics and governance

statements Webster (2019) points to the language of ‘secure/safe and controllable’ and ‘self-discipline’
as ‘mesh[ing] with broader trends in Chinese digital governance’.

Finally, an expert group formed of researchers at Chinese universities and established by the Chinese
Government Ministry of Science and Technology released its eight Governance Principles for the New
Generation Artificial Intelligence: Developing Responsible Artificial Intelligence in June 2019 (China Daily
2019). It has been reported that other experts, notably Kai-Fu Lee, made written submissions to the
committee at earlier stages in their work (Laskai & Webster 2019). Again international cooperation is
emphasised in the principles, including along with ‘full respect’ for AI development in other countries. A
possibly novel inclusion is the idea of ‘agile governance’, that problems arising from AI can be addressed
and resolved ‘in a timely manner’. This principle reflects the rapidity of AI development and the difficulty
in governing it through conventional procedures, for example through legislation which can take a long
time to pass in China by which time the AI technology may have already changed. While ‘agile policymaking’ is a term also used by the EU High-Level Expert Panel, it is used in relation to e.g. the regulatory
sandbox approach, as opposed to resolving problems, and is also not included in the Panel’s Guidelines
as a principle.

While, as mentioned above, Chinese tech corporations have been involved in AI ethics and governance
initiatives both domestically in China and internationally in the form of the Partnership on AI, they also
appear to be internally considering ethics in their AI activities. Tencent has its AI for Social Good
programme and ARCC (Available, Reliance, Comprehensible, Controllable) Principles (Si 2018) but does
not appear at the time of writing to have an internal ethics board to review AI developments.

However, the principles set by these initiatives so far lack legal enforcement/enforceability and policy
implications - like the AI ethics/governance guidelines elsewhere.

AI in Hong Kong

Under the ‘One Country, Two Systems’ framework, Hong Kong SAR remains a semi-autonomous region
of China, with its own legal system until 2047. Its development, uptake and governance of AI present a
different picture to that of mainland China.

In a regional report for the IEEE written in 2017, Yu pointed to AI adoption and development in Hong
Kong being somewhat fragmented and only a little behind regional neighbours but viewed Hong Kong as
having more progress to make ‘before it can credibly tackle some of the legal, policy or ethical issues
surrounding AI’.

Since that report was written, there has been one major development in Hong Kong. The Privacy
Commissioner for Personal Data (PCPD), Hong Kong, issued an Ethical Accountability Framework in 2018,
following industry consultation (but it is not clear if there was any consultation with academia and civil
society). The discussion in the Framework explicitly links the issue of data ethics to AI, and acknowledges
the additional guidance an ethical approach can give to the principles-based and technology-neutral
legislation (the Privacy (Data Protection) Ordinance). The Framework includes a series of ‘Enhanced
Elements’ and three ‘recommended’ Hong Kong Data Stewardship Values of ‘Respectful, Beneficial and
Fair’ which were developed with the industry consultees, along with two assessment models for use by
stakeholders. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority (2019) has encouraged ‘authorised institutions’ to
adopt the Framework regarding personal data in the context of fintech development.

5. United States of America
Widely believed to rival only China in its domestic research and development of AI, the US has been less
active institutionally regarding questions of ethics, governance and regulation compared to
developments in China and the EU, until the recent Trump Administration Executive Order on
Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence from February 2019.

This Order has legal force, and creates an American AI Initiative guided by five high level principles and
to be implemented by the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) Select Committee on
Artificial Intelligence. These principles include the US driving development of ‘appropriate technical
standards’ and protecting ‘civil liberties, privacy and American values’ in AI applications ‘to fully realize
the potential for AI technologies for the American people’. Internationalisation is included with the view
of opening foreign markets for US AI technology and protecting the US’s critical AI technology ‘from
acquisition by strategic competitors and adversarial nations’.

Furthermore, executive departments and agencies that engage in AI related activities such as developing
it, providing educational grants and ‘regulat[ing] and provid[ing] guidance for applications of AI
technologies’ must adhere to six strategic objectives including protection of ‘American technology,
economic and national security, civil liberties, privacy, and values’ and ensuring that technical standards
for AI ‘minimize vulnerability to attacks from malicious actors and reflect Federal priorities for
innovation, public trust, and public confidence in systems that use AI technologies; and develop
international standards to promote and protect those priorities’.

The Order also contains some Guidance on Regulation of AI Applications, whereby agencies are to
receive a memorandum from the Office of Management and Budget within 180 days to inform their
regulatory and non-regulatory approaches to AI which ‘advance American innovation while upholding
civil liberties, privacy, and American values’ and shall ‘consider ways to reduce barriers to the use of AI
technologies in order to promote their innovative application while protecting civil liberties, privacy,
American values, and United States economic and national security’. A draft of this memorandum is to
be made publicly available before it is sent to these agencies, which appears not to have happened at
the time of writing.

Finally, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) was tasked by the Executive Order
with creating a plan for federal engagement in developing technical standards for reliable, robust, and
trustworthy AI systems. In May 2019 NIST issued a Request For Information to this effect.

In addition, the US Department of Defense launched its AI Strategy, also in February 2019. The Strategy
explicitly mentions US military rivals China and Russia investing in military AI ‘including in applications
that raise questions regarding international norms and human rights’, as well as the perceived ‘threat’ of
these developments to the US and ‘the free and open international order’. As part of the Strategy, the
Department asserts that it ‘will articulate its vision and guiding principles for using AI in a lawful and
ethical manner to promote our values’, and will ‘continue to share our aims, ethical guidelines, and
safety procedures to encourage responsible AI development and use by other nations’. The
Department’s Joint Artificial Intelligence Center will, among other tasks, ‘[f]acilitate AI planning, policy,
governance, ethics, safety, cybersecurity, and multilateral coordination’. As regards more detailed
principles, the Department asserted that it would develop principles for AI ethics and safety in defence
matters after multistakeholder consultations, with the promotion of the Department’s views to a more
global audience, with the seemingly intended consequence that its vision will inform a global set of
military AI ethics.

As well as these recent interventions from the federal government, the US has a stronger record of AI
ethics and governance activity from the private and not-for-profit sectors. Various US-headquartered/originating multinational tech corporations have issued ethics statements on their AI activities, notably
the Microsoft AI Principles. DeepMind (part of Google’s Alphabet group of companies) also has its own
Ethics and Society Principles. In 2019, Google itself announced that it had set up an AI Ethics committee
of experts to inform its AI activities, but not long after this announcement, Google disbanded the
committee, seemingly due to the controversial views of one panel member and the negative public
reaction and reaction from Google employees (Turner 2019).

There are various not-for-profit organisations and foundations based in the US which have also been
active in AI governance and ethics discussions. The Future of Life Institute released its 23 Asilomar AI
Principles, developed in conjunction with their Beneficial AI conference in 2017. Participants in the
process appeared to come mainly from academia and industry. OpenAI, a mixed organisation with forprofit and not-for-profit wings, released its OpenAI Charter, detailing the principles the organisation
uses to guide its activities in accordance with its mission that artificial general intelligence (systems
which outperform humans at economically valuable work) benefits all humanity.

As regards applications of AI in the form of facial recognition technology, in May 2019 the city of San
Francisco prohibited the use of facial recognition technology by city agencies and the police department
- although the technology was seemingly not being used by the police department there prior to the ban
(Sandler 2019). The prohibition was motivated by concerns about the inaccuracies in using facial
recognition technology especially for people of colour, and about racial discimination in how facial

recognition technology has been deployed elsewhere to target specific, particularly racial, groups and
communities (Sandler 2019).

6. Australia
Australia is in a unique situation as the only Western democracy without comprehensive enforceable
protection of human rights (that is, no bill of rights, no comprehensive constitutional protection of
rights). Despite this, there has been increasing attention in Australia on the human rights impacts of
technology, and the development of an ethics framework for AI. Specifically, the Australian Human
Rights Commission has commenced a Technology and Human Rights project, including releasing a white
paper for public consultation, although a final report is yet to be published. Further, the Australian
Government Department of Industry, Innovation and Science has recently released a discussion paper to
inform the development of Australia’s ethics framework for Artificial Intelligence (initial submissions on
the discussion paper closed at the end of May 2019). In addition, in 2018, the Office of the Victorian
Information Commissioner released an issues paper on Artificial Intelligence and Privacy.

The most prominent of these developments is the proposed Australian Ethical Framework currently
under development by Data 61 and CSIRO in the Commonwealth Department of Industry, Innovation
and Science. The discussion paper commences with an examination of existing ethical frameworks,
principles and guidelines. The report includes a selection of case studies, these are largely international
or US based, which overshadows the unique Australian (e.g. socio-political) context.

The report dedicates a chapter to considerations of ‘data governance’ (i.e. privacy and data protection)
which has been critiqued extensively by a coalition of Australian privacy experts, as representing a
fundamental misunderstanding of Australian privacy law (Johnson 2019). Further, there is a focus on
matters of ‘consent’ where it may not be relevant in either current or future data processing landscapes.
In addition, when discussing issues of data governance there is a need to distinguish between personal
information and sensitive information, and also to consider sensitive inferences (see Wachter and
Mittelstadt’s work (2018) on a right to reasonable inferences). The report sets forth a very narrow
understanding of the negative impacts of AI for privacy, for example, a focus on data breaches or the
potential for re-identification of de-identified data. Rather, there is a need to consider other harms, for
example, such as those that could arise from automated decision-making. The report does indeed
dedicate a chapter on automated decisions but does not consider or refer to regulatory approaches to
respond or regulate to automated decision making, processing or profiling (for example, Article 22 of
the EU’s GDPR). Further, there is a need to consider the complexities of processing/profiling large sets of
data, abstraction from data, including sensitive inferences, as mentioned above. The report then
considers examples of AI in practice, and then outlines a proposed ethical framework.

Principles for Australia’s AI Ethical Framework

The development of the proposed Australian AI ethical framework was guided by a steering committee
comprising industry, government, community organisations, and CSIRO/Data61 researchers. It should
also be noted that CSIRO/Data61 is a Commonwealth entity that is developing AI technology for the
Commonwealth government. The discussion paper sets out eight core or key principles to form an
ethical framework for AI, namely: generates net-benefits; do no harm; regulatory and legal compliance;
privacy protection; fairness; transparency and explainability; contestability; and explainability.

The proposed Australian AI ethical framework is accompanied by a ‘toolkit’ of strategies, which appear
to be attempts to operationalise the high level ethical principles in practice. The ‘toolkit’ indicates how
the high-level ethical principles are intended to translate into practice. These include: impact
assessments; internal/external review; risk assessments; best practice guidelines; industry standards;
collaboration; mechanisms for monitoring and improvement; recourse mechanisms, and; consultation.

Australia’s ethical framework and the associated ‘toolkit’ is presently under development, and will
continue to evolve and be refined on the basis of public submissions and consultation over the near
future. In general, the proposed Australian principles do not seem very different to other ethical
principles especially from other Western jurisdictions.

7. Reflections, issues and next steps
Here we offer some tentative reflections on the country/region profiles outlined above, and also the
issue of the global governance of AI more generally which we set out here. Some of these reflections
lead to further questions for further analysis of the different ethics and governance initiatives (and lack
thereof in some cases).

1. Have and have-nots
Of the large jurisdictions we have considered, it is interesting to note that the European Union and
China seem most advanced in their consideration of ethical aspects of AI. The US may soon make up for
lost time subsequent to the directions in the Executive Order from earlier this year. However, India
stands alone as the one of the four ‘large jurisdictions’ under consideration which has not yet developed
ethics guidelines for AI.

2. Competition vs collaboration
Themes of competition loom large over national/regional AI policies, as regards competition with other
‘large’ countries or jurisdictions. It is widely believed and asserted that the US and China are the global
forerunners in AI research and development and are in direct competition with each other (Cave and
ÓhÉigeartaigh 2018). This may be reflected in the US Executive Order being framed around preserving
the US’s competitive position, and also the Chinese ambition for China to become the global AI leader in
2030. This competition takes both economic and also security (including military) dimensions, especially
in the latter case for state-used AI and AI technologies applied in public infrastructure.

However, there are also calls for global collaboration on AI ethics and governance, notably from the
Chinese initiatives. This can be contrasted, on the face of it at least, with language from the US
government initiatives which seems to reflect the ‘America First’ approach of the Trump Administration
more broadly, whereby ethics and governance may be devised in the US for AI and then ‘shared’ or
exported to the rest of the world. While less explicit, the European approaches which reference
European legal texts such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU may foresee an attempt to
export ‘European values’ regarding ethical AI globally, as de facto may be happening for data protection
via the EU GDPR’s extraterritorial reach.

Not only among the big powers, but also internally do we also see some economic competition,
particularly in the case of the EU where there are EU-level AI initiatives and strategies, but also possibly

competing initiatives at the national level in some Member States. The relationship between Member
States and the EU centrally may influence the development of such national strategies, especially when
that relationship has broken down, as in the case of the UK leaving the EU. The UK’s own national AI
strategies and attempt to position the UK as a leader in ethical AI ought to be considered against this
backdrop, especially when its European competitor Germany is also positioning itself in this space.

For smaller countries which may not be able to compete with the ‘big boys’ of global AI, Austria suggests
that they may be willing to engage in less ethical projects to attract attention and investment (although
this may also be the case for India if it positions itself as an AI ‘garage’), and the Australian example
shows how they may be ‘followers’ rather than ‘leaders’ inasmuch as they receive ethical principles and
approaches formulated by other, similar but larger countries.

3. Similarities and differences
In many of the AI ethics/governance statements, we see similar if not the same concept reappear, such
as transparency explainability, accountability etc. Hagendorff (2019) has pointed out that these
principles, frequently encountered, are often ‘the most easily operationalized mathematically’ which
may account partly for their presence in many initiatives.

Some form of ‘privacy’ or ‘data protection’ also features frequently, even in the absence of robust
privacy/data protection laws as in the US example. In the case of India, a lack of data protection law at
the time of writing is viewed as a reason explaining why there is no AI ethics/governance document yet
issued there.

As mentioned earlier, some AI ethics initiatives present some differences, both in terms of which actors
have formulated them (public vs private sector; civil society involvement; academic expertise etc), the
content of principles articulated (e.g. China’s ‘agile governance’) and the general framing of the
statements of principles.

Nevertheless, behind some of these shared principles may lie different cultural, legal and philosophical
understandings. This is a point to interrogate further in future work.

4. What’s not included?

Another important issue is what is not included in AI ethics/governance initiatives, i.e. what is missing
from the lists of principles. Is reference made to other government or corporate initiatives which may

contradict the principles? To what extent are the ‘hidden costs’ of AI made visible and internalised, such
as the energy and other human resources and raw materials needed for the systems (Hagendorff 2019)?
The language of sustainability in the EU High-Level Expert Panel’s Recommendations does acknowledge
the environmental and sustainability aspects and concerns regarding the creation and use of AI
technologies.

A further question is the extent to which the very use of AI in the first place is ethically interrogated by
AI and ethics and governance statements, or just assumed to be used, or will inevitably be used.

And what about the broader social contexts in which AI finds itself deployed - this seems rarely if ever to
be considered in AI ethics/governance initiatives explicitly.

5. What’s already there?

There are already different areas of existing law, policy and governance which will apply to AI and its
implementations including technology and industrial policy, data protection, intellectual property,
fundamental rights, private law, administrative law, etc. Sometimes these existing regimes are taken
account of in AI ethics/governance initiatives but in many cases, they are not, or indeed in the Australian
example, may have been mischaracterised and misunderstood.

While less ‘exciting’ and ‘novel’ than proposing new governance frameworks, important work needs to
be done to understand better the interactions of these existing frameworks with AI and the extent to
which further action is necessary, or could be guided, as has been called for in the EU. It is important for
those to whom AI ethics and governance guidelines area addressed to be aware that they may need to
consider, and comply with, further principles and norms in their AI research, development and
application beyond those articulated in AI-specific guidelines.

6. Implementation and enforceability
Almost all of the AI ethics and governance documents we have considered do not have the force of
binding law. The US Executive Order is an exception in that regard, although constitutes more a series of
directions to government agencies rather than a detailed set of legally binding ethical principles. This
situation overall leads to concerns about ‘ethics washing’ (Wagner 2018; Watts 2019) as mentioned
earlier in relation to the EU High-Level Expert Panel activities, but on a broader scale: that ethics and
governance initiatives without the binding force of law are mere ‘window dressing’ while unethical uses
of AI by governments and corporations continue. Indeed, in various of the countries and regions we

have examined, despite the existence of ethical guidelines on AI, unethical AI applications exist, which
may fail a test against those very principles.

This also leads to a broader question about the operationalisation of ethical and governance initiatives,
especially those which articulate principles and norms for AI. Can they and will they actually be
implemented into law, business and technical practices in public and private sector AI in their respective
countries, regions and corporations? How will this be assessed? Will there be meaningful consequences
if this does not happen?

Some ethics statements also include regulatory or legal compliance as an ethical principle, such as in the
Australian example. While this may acknowledge that existing laws and regulations may not have been
complied with in the past by AI researchers, developers and implementers, such an ethical principle may
seem odd, inasmuch as it may be considered the law ought to be complied with anyway. However, such
an ethical principle also does not account for situations where the existing law may be unethical or
otherwise lacking.

A further issue arises around organisations or researchers from a particular country or region which
does have AI ethics/governance principles 'jurisdiction shopping’ to a location which does not or has
laxer standards to research and develop AI with less ‘constraints’? This offshoring of AI development to
‘less ethical’ countries may already be happening and is something that should in particular be
addressed in national/regional ethics and governance initiatives.

A historical perspective is also warranted regarding the likelihood of success for AI ethics/governance
initiatives, in the form of examining the success or otherwise of previous attempts to govern new
technologies, such as biotech and the Internet, or to insert ethics in other domains such as medicine
(see Mittelstadt 2019). While there are specificities for each new technology, different predecessor
technologies from which it has sprung, as well as different social, economic and political conditions,
looking to the historical trajectory of new technologies and their governance may teach us some lessons
for AI governance and ethics.

7. Who is involved?
A key question for analysing AI ethics and governance activities further in future work is examining
which actors are involved in their processes of formulation - at the global or national levels. To what
extent are academic experts and civil society groups involved and to what extent are their voices and
input heard and considered? Do civil society groups which are involved represent the public in practice,

or subsections of the public? Who funds the groups and initiatives? Is there enough genuine public
consultation to ensure AI has a social licence to operate in a particular country, or for particular
applications? Is the formulation of AI ethics and governance largely a technocratic exercise? To what
extent are participants in AI and its governance and ethics debates and initiatives demographically
representative of the population at large? Hagendorff (2019) has criticised a lack of gender diversity in
the AI field as an example of how ethical goals are being ‘underachieved’.

We have identified scope for further work on AI ethics and global governance in the preceding
paragraphs as well as earlier in this report when we outlined the limitations of this work. Further work
may also be conducted to continue to track and analyse emerging and new AI ethics and governance
initiatives, as well as appraise how existing initiatives are being implemented. We as a collective and as
individual researchers may do some of this work ourselves, but we also look to such further work being
done by others. To that extent, if you are interested in collaborating with some or all of us, please get in
touch!

References
All-Party Parliamentary Group on Artificial Intelligence (APPG AI). (n.d.). Retrieved from:
https://www.appg-ai.org/
Arkin, R. (2009). Ethical robots in warfare. IEEE Technology & Society Magazine, 28(1), 30-33.
doi:10.1109/MTS.2009.931858
Australian Government Department of Industry, Innovation and Science. (2019). Artificial intelligence:
Australia's ethics framework. Retrieved from: https://consult.industry.gov.au/strategicpolicy/artificial-intelligence-ethics-framework/
Australian Human Rights Commission. (2018). Human rights and technology. Retrieved from:
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/rights-and-freedoms/projects/human-rights-andtechnology
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence. (2019). Beijing AI principles. Retrieved from:
http://www.baai.ac.cn/blog/beijing-ai-principles.
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie, &
Bundesministerium für Arbeit und Soziales. (2018). Strategie künstliche intelligenz der
bundesregierung. Retrieved from:
https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Publikationen/Technologie/strategie-kuenstlicheintelligenz-der-bundesregierung.html
Bundesministerium Verkehr, Innovation und Technologie and Bundesministerium Digitalisierung und
Wirtschaftsstandort. AIM at 2030: Artificial Intelligence Mission Austria 2030. Retrieved from:
https://www.bmvit.gv.at/innovation/publikationen/ikt/downloads/aimat_ua.pdf
Calo, R. (2015). Robotics and the lessons of cyberlaw. California Law Review, 103(3), 513-63.
doi:10.2139/ssrn.2402972
Cave, S. & ÓhÉigeartaigh, S. (2018). An AI Race for Strategic Advantage: Rhetoric and Risks. Paper
presented at AI Ethics And Society Conference, New Orleans, USA. Retrieved from:
http://www.aies-conference.com/wp-content/papers/main/AIES_2018_paper_163.pdf
China Daily. (2019). Governance principles for the new generation Artificial Intelligence--Developing
responsible Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from:
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201906/17/WS5d07486ba3103dbf14328ab7.html?from=grou
pmessage&isappinstalled=0
Cisse, M. (2018). Look to Africa to advance Artificial Intelligence. Nature, 562(7728), 461.
doi:10.1038/d41586-018-07104-7

Consultative Committee of the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic
Processing of Personal Data (Convention 108). (2019). Guidelines on Artificial Intelligence and
data protection. Retrieved from: https://rm.coe.int/guidelines-on-artificial-intelligence-anddata-protection/168091f9d8
Council of Europe. (n.d.). Council of Europe and Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from:
https://www.coe.int/en/web/artificial-intelligence
Delcker, J. (2018). US, Russia block formal talks on whether to ban ‘killer robots’. Politico. Retrieved
from: https://www.politico.eu/article/killer-robots-us-russia-block-formal-talks-on-whether-toban/
DeepMind. (n.d.). Ethics and society principles. Retrieved from:
https://deepmind.com/applied/deepmind-ethics-society/principles/
Edwards, L. & Veale, M. (2017). Slave to the algorithm? Why a ‘right to an explanation’ is probably not
the remedy you are looking for. Duke Law & Technology Review, 16(1), 18-84.
doi:10.2139/ssrn.2972855
ELRC. (2019). Artificial Intelligence: An evangelical statement of principles. Retrieved from:
https://erlc.com/resource-library/statements/artificial-intelligence-an-evangelical-statement-ofprinciples
European Commission. (2018). European group on ethics in science and new technologies statement on
Artificial Intelligence, robotics and ‘autonomous’ systems. Retrieved from:
https://ec.europa.eu/research/ege/pdf/ege_ai_statement_2018.pdf
European Commission Independent High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. (2019a). Ethics
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI. Final Report. Retrieved from: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-singlemarket/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
European Commission Independent High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. (2019b). Policy
and Investment Recommendations for Trustworthy AI. Retrieved from:
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/policy-and-investment-recommendationstrustworthy-artificial-intelligence
European Commission for the Administration of Justice (CEPEJ). (2018). European ethical charter on the
use of Artificial Intelligence in judicial systems and their environment. Retrieved from:
https://rm.coe.int/ethical-charter-en-for-publication-4-december-2018/16808f699c
European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies. (2018). Statement on Artificial Intelligence,
robotics and ‘autonomous systems’. Retrieved from:
https://ec.europa.eu/research/ege/pdf/ege_ai_statement_2018.pdf

European Parliament. (2017). Resolution of 16 February 2017 with recommendations to the Commission
on Civil Law Rules on Robotics (2015/2103(INL)). Retrieved from: https://eurlex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN#d1e2793-1-1
Ferguson, A.G. (2017). The rise of big data policing: Surveillance, race and the future of law enforcement.
New York: NYU Press.
FLIA. (2017). China’s new generation of Artificial Intelligence development plan. English translation.
Retrieved from: https://flia.org/notice-state-council-issuing-new-generation-artificialintelligence-development-plan/
Future of Life Institute (2017). Asilomar AI principles. Retrieved from: https://futureoflife.org/aiprinciples/
G20. (2019). Ministerial statement on trade and digital economy. Retrieved from: https://g20tradedigital.go.jp/dl/Ministerial_Statement_on_Trade_and_Digital_Economy.pdf
Government of India Ministry of Commerce and Industry. (2018). Report of the Artificial Intelligence
Task Force. Retrieved from:
https://dipp.gov.in/sites/default/files/Report_of_Task_Force_on_ArtificialIntelligence_20March
2018_2.pdf
Government of India Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology. (n.d.). Digital India programme.
Retrieved from: https://digitalindia.gov.in/
Government of India Ministry of Finance. (n.d.). Make in India. Retrieved from:
www.makeinindia.com/home/
Government of India Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. (n.d.). Smart Cities Mission. Retrieved from:
http://www.smartcities.gov.in/content/
Hagendorff, T. (2019). The ethics of AI ethics. An evaluation of guidelines. arXiv, 1–15.
Hildebrandt, M. (2008). Defining profiling: A new type of knowledge? In M. Hildebrandt & S. Gutwirth
(Eds.), Profiling the European citizen: Cross-disciplinary perspectives (pp.17-45). Dordrecht:
Springer.
Höffe, O. (2013). Ethik: Eine einführung. München: C. H. Beck.
Hong Kong Monetary Authority. (2019). Use of personal data in Fintech development. Retrieved from:
https://www.hkma.gov.hk/media/eng/doc/key-information/guidelines-andcircular/2019/20190503e1.pdf
House of Lords Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence. (2018). AI in the UK: Ready, willing, able?
Retrieved from: https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201719/ldselect/ldai/100/100.pdf

ICDPPC. (2018). Declaration on Ethics and Data Protection in Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from:
https://icdppc.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/20180922_ICDPPC-40th_AIDeclaration_ADOPTED.pdf
IEEE. (2018). Global initiative on ethics of autonomous and intelligent systems - Ethically aligned design,
version 2. Retrieved from: https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieeestandards/standards/web/documents/other/ead_v2.pdf
Indigenous AI. (n.d.). Retrieved from: http://www.indigenous-ai.net/
ITU. (2018). United Nations activities on Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from:
https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/opb/gen/S-GEN-UNACT-2018-1-PDF-E.pdf
Johnson, A. (2019). The ethics of artificial intelligence: start with the law. Salinger Privacy. Retrieved
from: https://www.salingerprivacy.com.au/2019/04/27/ai-ethics/
Koizumi, M. (2019). G20 ministers agree on guiding principles for using artificial intelligence. Japan
Times. Retrieved from: https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2019/06/08/business/g20ministers-kick-talks-trade-digital-economy-ibaraki-prefecture/#.XRB3zY8RU2w
Laskai, L. & Webster, G. (2019). Translation: Chinese expert group offers 'governance principles' for
'responsible AI'. New America Foundation. Retrieved from:
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/translation-chineseexpert-group-offers-governance-principles-responsible-ai/
Leenes, R. & Lucivero, F. (2014). Laws on robots, laws by robots, laws in robots: Regulating robot
behaviour by design. Law, Innovation & Technology, 6(2), 193-220.
doi:10.5235/17579961.6.2.193
Marda, V. (2018). Artificial Intelligence Policy in India: A Framework for Engaging the Limits of DataDriven Decision-Making. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2133).
Mason, R. (2017). Four ethical issues of the information age. In J. Wekert (Ed.), Computer ethics (pp. 418). London: Routledge.
Metzinger, T. (2019). EU guidelines: Ethics washing made in Europe. Der Tagesspeigel. Retrieved from:
https://www.tagesspiegel.de/politik/eu-guidelines-ethics-washing-made-ineurope/24195496.html
Microsoft. (n.d.). Our approach to AI. Retrieved from: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/AI/ourapproach-to-ai
Mittelstadt, B. (2019). AI Ethics – Too principled to fail? Retrieved from:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3391293

National Institute for Science and Technology. (2019). NIST requests information on Artificial Intelligence
technical standards and tools. Retrieved from: https://www.nist.gov/newsevents/news/2019/05/nist-requests-information-artificial-intelligence-technical-standards-and
NITI Aayog. (2018). National strategy for Artificial Intelligence. Discussion paper. Retrieved from:
https://niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/document_publication/NationalStrategy-for-AIDiscussion-Paper.pdf
OECD. (2019). OECD Principles on AI. Retrieved from: https://www.oecd.org/going-digital/ai/principles/
O’Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and threatens
democracy. UK: Penguin, Random House.
OpenAI. (2018). OpenAI Charter. Retrieved from: https://openai.com/charter/
Partnership on AI. (n.d.). Tenets. Retrieved from: https://www.partnershiponai.org/tenets/
Office of the Victorian Information Commissioner. (2018). Artificial Intelligence and privacy. Issues
paper. Retrieved from: https://ovic.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/AI-Issues-PaperV1.1.pdf
Pekka, AP, Bauer, W., Bergmann, U., Bieliková, M., Bonefeld-Dahl, C., Bonnet, Y. et al. (2018). The
European Commission's High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. Ethics guidelines for
trustworthy AI. Working document for stakeholders' consultation. Retrieved from:
https://www.euractiv.com/wpcontent/uploads/sites/2/2018/12/AIHLEGDraftAIEthicsGuidelinespdf.pdf
Pichai, S. (2018). AI at Google: Our principles. Retrieved from:
https://www.blog.google/technology/ai/ai-principles/
Pressman, A. & Lashinsky, A. (2019). Data sheet—Trump's smart move on Artificial Intelligence. Fortune.
Retrieved from: http://fortune.com/2019/05/28/data-sheet-trump-artificial-intelligence-oecd/
Privacy Commissioner for Personal Data, Hong Kong. (2018). Ethical accountability framework for Hong
Kong, China: Analysis and model assessment framework. Retrieved from:
https://www.pcpd.org.hk/misc/files/Ethical_Accountability_Framework.pdf
Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J., Bonnefon, JF, Breazeal, C. et al. (2019). Machine
behaviour. Nature, 568(7753), 477–486. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1138-y
Russo, A. (2018). United Kingdom partners with World Economic Forum to develop first Artificial
Intelligence procurement policy. World Economic Forum. Retrieved from:
https://www.weforum.org/press/2018/09/united-kingdom-partners-with-world-economicforum-to-develop-first-artificial-intelligence-procurement-policy/

Sandler, R. (2019). San Francisco bans facial recognition technology. Forbes. Retrieved from:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/rachelsandler/2019/05/14/san-francisco-about-to-ban-facialrecognition/#6740f4ac7b80
Schreurs, W., Hildebrandt, M., Kindt, E., & Vanfleteren, M. (2008). Cogitas, ergo sum. The role of data
protection law and non-discrimination law in group profiling in the private sector. In M.
Hildebrandt & S. Gutwirth (Eds.), Profiling the European citizen: Cross-disciplinary perspectives
(pp. 241-70). Dordrecht: Springer.
Si, J. (2018). Towards an ethical framework for Artificial Intelligence. Retrieved from:
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/_CbBsrjrTbRkKjUNdmhuqQ
The White House. (2019). Executive order on maintaining American leadership in Artificial Intelligence.
Retrieved from: https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-ordermaintaining-american-leadership-artificial-intelligence/
Turner, J. (2019). Google disbands AI committee before first meeting. Tech.Co. Retrieved from:
https://tech.co/news/google-disbands-ai-committee-2019-04
UK Government. (2017). Industrial strategy: Building a Britain fit for the future. Retrieved from:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
UK Government Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy & Department for Digital,
Culture, Media & Sport. (2018). AI sector deal policy paper. Retrieved from:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/artificial-intelligence-sector-deal/ai-sector-deal
US Department of Defense. (2019). Summary of the 2018 Department of Defense Artificial Intelligence
strategy: Harnessing AI to advance our security and prosperity. Retrieved from:
https://media.defense.gov/2019/Feb/12/2002088963/-1/-1/1/SUMMARY-OF-DOD-AISTRATEGY.PDF
Wachter, S. & Mittelstadt, B. (2018). A right to reasonable inferences: Re-thinking data protection law in
the age of Big Data and AI. Oxford Business Law Blog. Retrieved from:
https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/business-law-blog/blog/2018/10/right-reasonable-inferences-rethinking-data-protection-law-age-big
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., & Floridi, L. (2017a). Transparent, explainable, and accountable AI for
robotics. Science Robotics, 2(6). doi:10.1126/scirobotics.aan6080
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., & Floridi, L. (2017b). Why a right to explanation of automated decisionmaking does not exist in the General Data Protection Regulation. International Data Privacy
Law, 7(2), 76-99. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2903469
Wagner, B. (2018). Ethics as an escape from regulation: From ethics-washing to ethics-shopping? In M.
Hildebrandt (Ed.), Being profiling. Cogitas ergo sum. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

Walker, D. (2018). UK gov is making a ‘massive strategic error’ on AI funding. IT Pro. Retrieved from:
https://www.itpro.co.uk/machine-learning/30654/uk-gov-is-making-a-massive-strategic-erroron-ai-funding
Watts, D. (2019). How big tech designs its own rules of ethics to avoid scrutiny and accountability. The
Conversation. Retrieved from: https://theconversation.com/how-big-tech-designs-its-own-rulesof-ethics-to-avoid-scrutiny-and-accountability-113457
Webster, G. (2019). Translation: Chinese AI alliance drafts self-discipline 'Joint Pledge'. New America
Foundation. Retrieved from: https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurityinitiative/digichina/blog/translation-chinese-ai-alliance-drafts-self-discipline-joint-pledge/
World Economic Forum. (2019). AI governance: A holistic approach to implement ethics into AI.
Retrieved from:
https://weforum.my.salesforce.com/sfc/p/#b0000000GycE/a/0X000000cPl1/i.8ZWL2HIR_kAnvc
kyqVA.nVVgrWIS4LCM1ueGy.gBc
Yu, R. (2017). EADv2 regional reports on A/ISEthics: Hong Kong. Retrieved from:
https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieeestandards/standards/web/documents/other/eadv2_regional_report.pdf

Further Resources
ARTICLE 19 and Privacy International. (2019). Privacy and Freedom of Expression in the Age of Artificial
Intelligence. Retrieved from: https://www.article19.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Privacyand-Freedom-of-Expression-In-the-Age-of-Artificial-Intelligence-1.pdf
ARTICLE 19. (2019). Governance with Teeth How human rights can strengthen FAT and ethics initiatives
on
artificial
intelligence.
Retrieved
from:
https://www.article19.org/wpcontent/uploads/2019/04/Governance-with-teeth_A19_April_2019.pdf
Algorithms
Watch.
AI
Ethics
Guidelines
Global
Inventory.
Retrieved
https://algorithmwatch.org/en/project/ai-ethics-guidelines-global-inventory/

from:

Arun, C. (2019). AI and the Global South: Designing for Other Worlds. In M. Dubber, F. Pasquale, & S. Das
(Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Retrieved from: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3403010
Daly, A. (2017). Privacy in Automation: An Appraisal of the Emerging Australian Approach. Computer
Law & Security Review, 33(6), 836-846.
Daly, A., Devitt, S.K., & Mann, M. (eds). (2019). Good Data. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Retrieved from: http://networkcultures.org/blog/publication/tod-29-good-data/
Ebers, M. (2019). Chapter 2: Regulating AI and Robotics: Ethical and Legal Challenges. In M. Ebers & S.
Navas Navarro (Eds.), Algorithms and Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
Retrieved from: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3392379
Fjeld, J., Hilligoss, H., Achten, N., Levy Daniel, M., Feldman, J. & Kagay, S. (2019). Principled Artificial
Intelligence. Retrieved from: https://ai-hr.cyber.harvard.edu/primp-viz.html
Future of Life. Global AI Policy. Retrieved from: https://futureoflife.org/ai-policy/
Gal, D. (2019). Perspectives and Approaches in AI Ethics: East Asia. In M. Dubber, F. Pasquale, & S. Das
(Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Retrieved from: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3400816
Latonero, M. (2018). Governing Artificial Intelligence: Upholding Human Rights & Dignity. Data & Society.
Retrieved
from:
https://datasociety.net/wpcontent/uploads/2018/10/DataSociety_Governing_Artificial_Intelligence_Upholding_Human_Ri
ghts.pdf
Linking Artificial Intelligence Policies: http://www.linking-ai-principles.org/

OECD. (2019). Artificial Intelligence in Society. Paris: OECD Publishing. Retrieved from: https://read.oecdilibrary.org/science-and-technology/artificial-intelligence-in-society_eedfee77-en#page1
Politics + AI. Retrieved from: https://medium.com/politics-ai
UN ITU AI Repository. Retrieved from: https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/AI/Pages/ai-repository.aspx
World

Economic Forum Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. Retrieved
https://www.weforum.org/communities/artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning

from:

