© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

Artificial Intelligence (AI) Governance: An Overview © Alexander A Wodi*1
Abstract
The explosion of interest in AI which bestrode the introduction of OpenAI’s Chat GPT and GPT 4
underscores the need for this overview to contextualize and address public concerns.
If you are like me or most people, my early impression of Artificial Intelligence (AI) was largely
influenced and shaped by Hollywood. I remember the doomsday scenario in the Terminator movie
franchise. However, there is more to AI than killer robots or drones. AI has huge potential in such
areas as finance, agriculture, manufacturing, medicine, robotics, research, education, autonomous
vehicles, including law enforcement, military, and defence applications. AI like many human
technologies and discoveries has a dual use problem. Meaning it may be employed for good or
bad. It is often the fear of the latter that is reflected in movies. The rapid evolution of AI technology
at breakneck speed has implications for humans and society. AI and Algorithm bias and
discrimination, systemic and environmental risks, the intersections between AI and data privacy,
torts, and IP rights violations have made AI governance a necessity and imperative.
This paper looks at global and regional efforts to come up with strategies and regulatory
frameworks for AI governance. Chief amongst them include the OECD AI Principles; the EU AI
Act; and the NIST AI RMF. The common thread running through these frameworks and legislation
is identifying and categorizing AI developments and deployments according to their risk levels
and providing guidelines for ethical and trustworthy AI with considerations for human safety and
innovation. Also identified and examined are a few national and state efforts, namely in the US,
UK, Canada, China, Nigeria, and Singapore.
The objective is to facilitate understanding of AI governance among AI stakeholders and arm AI
actors with the tools to establish a robust AI risks management framework and compliance regime.
Key Words: AI, AI Governance, Data Privacy, OECD AI Principles, NIST AI RMF, EU AI Act.

*1 Alex Wodi (JD/LLB, BL, LLM, CIPP/US, ISC2 CC, ACIArb, UK, Member ICMC) is a lawyer and a certified
cybersecurity and data privacy professional. He has a background in banking and commercial law, regulatory
compliance, international law, and comparative law. He is also a chartered arbitrator, mediator, and conciliator. He has
written many scholarly articles and is the author of Garnishment Law and Practice in Nigeria, UK, and US (Amazon,
and Barnes & Noble, 2023) ISBN 9798987288306 and The Most Expensive Real Estate and Other Works: An
Anthology of Essays, Poems and Artworks on the Cusp of a Pandemic (Amazon, 2021) ISBN 9798706781880. He
may be contacted via email – aawodi21@yahoo.com or alexwodi@wodiandwodi.com.

i

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

Contents
1.0 AI and AI Governance ………………………………………………………………….….... 1
1.1 AI and AI Systems: Types and Applications ……………………………….…….……... 2
1.2. What is AI Governance? …………………………………………………….....….……. 9
1.3. Why is AI Governance Important? ………………………………………..…….……… 10
2.0. OECD AI Principles …………………………………………………………………….…. 19
3.0. NIST AI RMF ………………………………………………………………………….…... 25
4.0. EU AI Act ………………………………………………………………….…….……….... 32
5.0. Other Global Trends …………………………………………………………………….…. 38
6.0. Next Steps.…………………………………………………………………………….….… 52

ii

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

1.0 AI and AI Governance
Artificial intelligence (AI) may very well be the greatest invention of our time. It has been likened
to the discovery of fire or the invention of the internet. The rapid growth and various use cases of
AI have implications for humans and society. This has heightened interest in the subject matter,
the regulatory frameworks, and strategies to be adopted by governments, big technology
companies, consumers, lobbyists, activists, and other stakeholders to govern and manage AI.
AI has become the number one topic at board meetings1 and government fora.2 Primus amongst
their concerns are how best to regulate AI, integrate AI into the economy and build capacity around
AI. Governments must adopt AI strategies that preserve the rights and freedoms of consumers and
at the same time promote and do not stifle research and development. In sum, ensuring “innovative
and trustworthy AI.”
Presently there are essentially three major approaches to AI Governance identifiable globally.
These are distributed among the three dominant digital powers – European Union (EU), United
States (US), and China. They are the comprehensive legislation approach adopted by the EU; the
industry-specific approach adopted by the US; and the state-controlled approach adopted by
China.3 The US has pioneered a market driven model, China a state-driven model and the EU a
rights-driven model.4 All three approaches reflect different AI regulatory guiding principles and
priorities tied to divergent economic theories, political ideologies, and cultural identities. 5
The convergence of AI benefits and risks is governance. AI Governance provides strategies,
standards, rules, and guidelines to manage the development and deployment of AI.
There are intersections between artificial intelligence and privacy law. This is because of the
importance of data to AI. Large datasets are used to train AI models. These may include personal
data.6 AI may also be used to process personal data or for automated decision making and profiling.
Personal data or Personally Identifying Information (PII) is any information or piece of
1
IOD – “AI in the Boardroom: The essential questions for your next board meeting” (IOD, 24 March 2023)
<https://www.iod.com/resources/science-innovation-and-tech/ai-in-the-boardroom-the-essential-questions-for-yournext-board-meetin/> accessed 19 May 2024.
2
Kostas Loukas and Madhavi Gosalia “AI innovation takes center stage at the World Governments Summit 2024”
(Microsoft, 14 March 2024) <https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/industry/blog/government/2024/03/14/ai-innovationtakes-center-stage-at-the-world-governments-summit-2024/> accessed 23 May 2024.
3
3 Essential Features to AI Governance (WEF, 28 November 2023)
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/11/generative-ai-governance-regulation/> accessed 3 April 2024.
4
A similar divergence of approach is notable in respect of privacy and privacy law.
5
Anu Bradford, Digital Empires (OUP 2023) 7.
6
Data sources could be first party (from data subjects directly); public sources (public records, websites or
publications); or third-party (from data brokers or companies that share or sell their data assets).

1

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person that can be used to identify such
person directly or indirectly.7
Sometimes sensitive personal data and Protected Health Information (PHI) may be affected. These
data are protected under such laws as the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 8 or
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 9 There have also been concerns
raised about violation of intellectual property (IP) law in respect of copyrighted works used as
training material for developing AI models.
1.1 AI and AI Systems: Types and Applications
From the abacus to modern computers the history of humanity and civilization is replete with
examples of mathematical and computational tools10 used to aid human intelligence11 and
ultimately mimic human intelligence and perform human-like tasks.12 Examples include the

7

Such as your name, address, phone number, date of birth, social security number, account number, national identity
number (NIN), bank verification number (BVN), URL or IP address, medical and health information, biometric data,
geographic information, or email address. GDPR, art 4 defines “personal data” thus - any information relating to an
identified or identifiable natural person (‘data subject’); an identifiable natural person is one who can be identified,
directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier such as a name, an identification number, location
data, an online identifier or to one or more factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic,
cultural, or social identity of that natural person.
8
GDPR, art 9 defines “sensitive personal data” or “special categories of personal data” to include - Race and ethnic
origin; political opinions; Religious or philosophical beliefs; Trade union membership; Genetic data; Biometric data;
Health data; and Sex life or sexual orientation. The GDPR prohibits processing of sensitive personal data except with
the explicit consent of the data subject.
9
HIPAA protects sensitive health information from being disclosed without the patient’s consent or knowledge.
10
David Darling, The Universal Book of Mathematics: From Abracadabra to Zeno’s Paradox (1st edn, Wiley 2004),
ISBN 0471270474.
11
Colossus, ENIAC, IBM 5100 are 19th – 20th century examples of programmable machines and early computers.
We are told Quantum Computing, Chemical Computing, DNA Computing and Optical Computing are the next wave.
12
ChatGPT, DALL-E and Midjourney are recent popular examples of AI, Generative AI in particular, used to generate
text and images from descriptive prompts. Open AI recently announced its latest AI model, Sora an AI video generator
capable of generating videos from simple text prompts. See AI Revolution, “AI Shocks Yet Again: New ChatGPT
Features, OpenAI Sora’s New Music Video, Samsung AI Fridge & More!” (YouTube, 5 April 2024)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nC1MqXXsXhg> accessed 6 April 2024.

2

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

Ishango bone,13 Abacus,14 Astrolabe,15 Babbage’s adding machine,16 ENIAC, Mainframe
Computers, IBM’s Deep Blue, Home Computers, laptops, smart phones, ChatGPT 17 and Quantum
Computers.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is one of the disruptive technologies identified in the Fourth Industrial
Revolution.18 The term “artificial intelligence” was coined in 1955 by John McCarthy of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in a bid to distinguish the field of AI from other fields
like “cybernetics” and “automata theory.” The term AI was formally introduced in the proposal for
the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence held in 1956.19 The Dartmouth
Workshop involved the top scientists and mathematicians of the time and is considered the pivotal
event establishing AI as a field of study. However, prior to that Alan Turing in a 1950 article titled
“Computing Machinery and Intelligence”20 had posed the question, “can machines think?” Turing
also proposed a Turing Test or imitation game to compare computer intelligence and human
intelligence. Turing’s paper attempted to deepen the concept of what would six years later be
termed “artificial intelligence.”21

The Ishango bone discovered in Congo (DRC) in 1950 is dated at between 18,000 to 20000 BCE (Upper Palaeolithic
Era) and is suggested to be a tool for performing simple arithmetic tasks or used as a lunar calendar for tracking
celestial events. The Ishango bone is often confused with the Lebombo bone, dated at over 40,000 BCE, conjectured
to be a tally stick discovered in a cave in the Lebombo Mountain located between South Africa and Eswatini. See
Adina Socaci, “The Ishango Bone: Unraveling the Earliest Evidence of Mathematics in Human History” (Medium, 24
July 2023) <https://adinasocaci.medium.com/the-ishango-bone-unraveling-the-earliest-evidence-of-mathematics-inhuman-history-85b9864e2e7c> accessed 21 December 2023.
14
The Abacus was used by the Babylonians, Romans, and Chinese from as early as 2400 BCE. See TI Oren, “Advances
in Computer and Information Sciences: From Abacus to Holonic Agents” Special Issue on Artificial Intelligence of
Elektrik (Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences - Published by TUBITAK - Turkish
Science and Technical Council) 9:1, 63-70.
15
The Astrolabe was used by the Greeks, Persians, and Arabs in ancient times as a star chart for working out problems
and calculations in astronomy. See Gentili, Graziano; Simonutti, Luisa; Struppa, C Daniele, “The Mathematics of the
Astrolabe and Its History” (2020) Journal of Humanistic Mathematics. 10: 101–144. doi:10.5642/jhummath.202001.0.
16
Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine and its proposed successor the Analytical Engine were inspired by the
Jacquard Loom and developed in collaboration with Ada Lovelace (daughter of Poet Lord Byron).
17
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) – AI that utilizes a transformer model that excels at understanding
context, meaning, and relationships in sequential data, which allows it to predict and generate human-like text.
18
Others include – blockchain, cloud computing, nanotechnology, IoT, 3D Printing, robotics, biotechnology and
genetic engineering, drone technology, quantum computing, VR and AR, autonomous vehicles et al. See World
Economic Forum (WEF) Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution Network Impact Report 2023-2023 (WEF,
January 2024). <https://www.weforum.org/publications/centre-for-the-fourth-industrial-revolution-network-20222023/> accessed 3 April 2024.
19
The Dartmouth Conference was a six to eight weeks brainstorming workshop comprising scientists and
mathematicians held between 18 June – 17 August 1956 at the top floor of the Dartmouth Math Department,
Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire.
20
AM Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” Mind, Volume LIX, Issue 236, October 1950, Pages 433–
460, https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433 Published: 01 October 1950.
21
P Paolo, “History of AI: From Alan Turing to John McCarthy, the first definition of Artificial Intelligence” (Pigro,
7 September 2021) <https://blog.pigro.ai/en/history-of-artificialintelligence#:~:text=McCarthy%20wanted%20a%20new%20neutral,the%20AI%20definition%20is%20used.>
accessed 8 December 2023.
13

3

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

So, what exactly is artificial intelligence? Artificial Intelligence (AI) has been defined in
reference to processes and algorithms that simulate human intelligence, including mimicking
cognitive functions such as perception, learning and problem solving. 22 Simply put AI is the ability
of machines to imitate intelligent human behavior.
AI is capable of being trained and deployed to perform faster and efficiently tedious and repetitive
tasks previously undertaken manually. These tasks include learning from experiences, interpreting
complex data, making decisions based on the information gathered, understanding natural
language, and recognizing patterns or objects.23
The core components of AI include algorithms, data, and computing power. AI is only as good as
the algorithms programmed, the data it is trained on, and the computing power available. 24 AI
algorithms are rules and instructions that guide data processing and decision-making in AI
systems.25
Artificial intelligence (AI) works by combining massive dataset, with fast, iterative processing and
intelligent algorithms, which enable software learn automatically from features and patterns in the
data. AI learns from experience, adjust to new inputs, and makes it possible for machines to
perform human-like tasks. Most examples of AI, from chess-playing computers to self-driving
cars, rely on deep learning and natural language processing technology. 26
AI involves two broad types: generative AI and predictive AI. Both generative AI and predictive
AI use advanced artificial intelligence algorithms to address complex business and logistical
challenges.
Generative AI (GenAI)- finds functionality in generating content, such as text, images, videos,
audio, and computer code. GenAI combines algorithms, deep learning, and neural network
techniques to analyze large datasets, learn from the vast amount of patterns in the datasets to mimic
style or structure to replicate a wide array of contemporary or historical content. 27 ChatGPT, for
example, is based on large language models (LLMs), which are built by “training” the AI models
on massive bodies of text often scraped from the internet. The models incorporate information

Benjamin M Sadun, “The Intersection of AI and Privacy” (USC Webinar, 18 March 2024).
R//C – “Artificial Intelligence: An Introduction to AI Fundamentals” (Redress Compliance, 11 March 2024)
<https://redresscompliance.com/artificial-intelligence-an-introduction-to-ai-fundamentals/> accessed 7 April 2024.
24
ibid.
25
ibid.
26
SAS, “Artificial Intelligence: What it is and why it matters” <https://www.sas.com/en_us/insights/analytics/whatis-artificial-intelligence.html> accessed 2 April 2024.
27
Aminu Abdullahi, “Generative AI vs. Predictive AI: What’s the Difference?” (eWeek, 11 January 2024)
<https://www.eweek.com/artificial-intelligence/generative-ai-vs-predictive-ai/> accessed 6 April 2024. SAS,
Generative AI: What it is and Why it Matters” <https://www.sas.com/en_us/insights/analytics/generative-ai.html>
accessed 2 April 2024.
22

23

4

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

from these datasets and “learn” the patterns of words within a given context. Then, when queried,
the LLM can predict the most likely combination of words, generating a natural-language response
to the user’s prompt. These texts are memorized and stored by the AI model and can be regurgitated
verbatim in response to a user query or prompt, which raises concerns about intellectual property
rights violation.28
Predictive AI - in contrast, uses statistical algorithms to analyze large historical data repositories
to recognize and identify patterns across time and makes predictions about the future that can better
inform decisions in business, finance forecasting, healthcare, 29 and fraud detection.30
Predictive AI can detect anomalies in data flows and draw inferences about future outcomes in
terms of results or behavior. It can ensure business success by providing a significant competitive
advantage in terms of strategy, predictive analytics and enhanced business operations and
processes.31
Both GenAI and predictive AI use machine learning models at their foundations. Machine
Learning (ML) is a subset of AI focused on the idea that systems can learn from data, identify
patterns, and make decisions with minimal human intervention. It involves algorithms that allow
computers to learn from and make predictions or decisions based on data.32 There are three main
kinds of learnings models usually employed in machine learning: Supervised Learning,
Unsupervised Learning, and Reinforcement Learning.
Supervised learning entails using labeled data sets (structured data) to train algorithms to classify
data or predict outcomes accurately by learning to maps an input to an output based on example
input-output pairs.
Unsupervised learning entails using unlabeled data (unstructured data). Unlike supervised
learning, the outcome is not known beforehand. The algorithm learns from the data, by classifying
it into groups based on attributes.33

Audrey Pope, “NYT v. OpenAI: The Times’s About-Face” (Harvard Law Review, 10 April 2024)
<https://harvardlawreview.org/blog/2024/04/nyt-v-openai-the-timess-about-face/> accessed 22 April 2024.
29
DeepMind Health, an AI research company owned by Alphabet, partnered with Moorfields Eye Hospital in London,
and developed an AI system capable of analyzing optical coherence tomography (OCT) scans, identifying over 50 eye
conditions with accuracy comparable to world-leading eye specialists.
30
Mastercard has integrated AI into its transaction processing systems to identify and prevent fraud in real-time.
31
A Abdullahi, ibid (n 27).
32
R//C, ibid.
33
Google Cloud, “What is Artificial Intelligence (AI)?” <https://cloud.google.com/learn/what-is-artificialintelligence> accessed 7 April 2024; Geeks for Geeks, “Supervised and Unsupervised Learning,” (GeeksforGeeks,
Last Updated 13 March 2024) <https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/supervised-unsupervised-learning/> accessed 8 April
2024.
28

5

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

Reinforcement learning is a machine learning model that can be broadly described as “learn by
doing.” An “agent” learns how to perform a defined task by trial and error (a feedback loop) until
it attains a pre-determined and acceptable range of performance.34
Deep Learning is a subset of machine learning that uses neural networks with many layers (hence,
“deep”). These neural networks attempt to simulate the behavior of the human brain—albeit at a
very basic level—allowing the machine to learn from large amounts of data. 35
AI may also be classified as Narrow, General and Super AI 36 based on their capabilities and
potential future development:
Narrow AI (or Weak AI) are AI systems designed and trained for a specific task. Examples of
Narrow AI include speech recognition systems like Siri or Alexa, recommendation systems on
Netflix or Amazon, and facial recognition technologies. Narrow AI lacks human’s understanding
or consciousness.37 Generative AI is a subset of Narrow AI or Specialized AI. Specialized AI is
designed to perform a specific task or task domain extremely well. It typically requires large
amounts of training data and is often used in industries such as recruitment, healthcare, finance,
and manufacturing.38
General AI (or Strong AI) are AI systems that can understand, learn, and apply their intelligence
to solve problems with the same competence as a human. This level of AI could perform any
intellectual task a human can. General AI is still theoretical, with no existing systems displaying
this level of versatility and adaptability. Its vast potential, however, encompasses the ability to
reason, solve puzzles, make judgments under uncertainty, plan, learn, and integrate prior
knowledge in decision-making processes.39
Super AI: Super AI is a hypothetical stage of artificial intelligence that surpasses human
intelligence across all fields, including creativity, general wisdom, and problem-solving. Its
implications are profound, raising questions about ethics, governance, and the very fabric of
human society. While the development of Super AI could lead to unparalleled technological
advancements and solutions to complex global challenges, it poses significant risks if not properly
managed, including ethical dilemmas and existential threats to humanity.40
Renowned British-Canadian computer scientist, Geoffrey Hinton, has expressed concerns about
the existential risks of artificial general intelligence. 41 He also identified such AI risks as misuse
Google Cloud, “What is Artificial Intelligence (AI)?” ibid.
R//C, ibid.
36
ibid.
37
ibid.
38
Mitchel de Bruin “Generic Generative AI vs. Specialized AI: What Are the Differences?” (Carv, 2024)
<https://www.carv.com/blog/generic-ai-vs-specialized-ai.> accessed 7 May 2024.
39
R//C, ibid.
40
ibid.
41
60 Minutes - "Godfather of AI" Geoffrey Hinton: The 60 Minutes Interview” (YouTube, 9 October 2023)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qrvK_KuIeJk> accessed 29 April 2024.
34

35

6

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

by malicious actors, deepfakes, massive job loss, massive surveillance, lethal autonomous
weapons, cybercrimes and deliberate pandemics, and bias and discrimination. He however noted
that the immense benefits of AI in healthcare provide good reason why the development of AI
should not be stopped.42 Hinton is considered “the Godfather of AI.” His ground-breaking work
with neural networks accelerated the development of AI and machine learning.
There have been much apprehension about the AI revolution and its potential impact on jobs and
the economy. Many workers fear AI would take over their jobs. 43 Historically technological
advancements have led to job losses, 44 however, my take is that AI (like computers) would enhance
productivity and those who will stay ahead of the curve are those who embrace the technology and
learn how to us it and apply it to their current job roles. I believe AI (Generative AI, in particular)
will augment and complement jobs and not replace them. Humans have unique traits like empathy,
creativity and problem-solving. It is that innovative and out-of-the-box thinking ability that sets us
apart from machines. The AI revolution may also create new industries and job creation.45 The key
is to upskill and reskill to remain relevant in the job market. Erik Brynjolfsson, the director of the
Digital Economy Lab at the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI, in a recent interview stated,
“I don’t think generative AI is going to replace workers, but workers who work with generative AI
will replace those who don’t.” 46
OpenAI’s development and deployment of ChatGPT and its different iterations since November
2022 has fuelled an arms race by big tech companies to develop their own Generative AI. 47 Hoping
to leverage and position themselves to profit from the new technology. In the book “Digital
Empires”48 Anu Bradford notes how five companies49 in the US that account for a major portion
of the revenue and control of the personal data and platforms where the digital economy sits. This
fact gives the said companies enormous economic and political power due to lukewarm
enforcement of anti-trust laws. Hence the need for some form of regulation to protect the
vulnerable and unsuspecting consumer public from unfair, deceptive, and abusive practices.

University of Oxford - Prof. Geoffrey Hinton – “Will digital intelligence replace biological intelligence?”
Romanes Lecture (YouTube, 19 February 2024) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N1TEjTeQeg0> accessed
29April 2024.
43
Josie Cox, “AI anxiety: The workers who fear losing their jobs to artificial intelligence” (BBC, 13 July 2023)
<https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20230418-ai-anxiety-artificial-intelligence-replace-jobs> accessed 3
December 2023.
44
Luddites in the 19th Century English Textile Industry protested being replaced by cost-saving machines by
destroying them. Similarly, thousands of lamplighters lost their jobs when Thomas Edison’s light bulb became
widely adopted and commercially successful in the late 19th and early 20th Century.
45
For example - AI ethicists, AI trainers, AI auditor, AI developers, and AI data scientists.
46
Jennifer Liu, “Stanford and MIT study: A.I. boosted worker productivity by 14%—those who use it ‘will replace
those who don’t’” (CNBC Make it, 25 April 2023) <https://www.cnbc.com/2023/04/25/stanford-and-mit-study-aiboosted-worker-productivity-by-14percent.html> accessed 28 October 2023.
47
Google’s Gemini, Midjourney Inc’s Midjourney and Stability AI’s Stable Diffusion are examples of the AI Boom.
48
Anu Bradford, Digital Empires: The Global Battle to Regulate Technology (OUP 2023) 2.
49
Amazon, Apple, Google, Meta, and Microsoft.
42

7

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

McKinsey’s June 2023 Report states that Generative AI alone has the potential to add between
$2.6 trillion and $4.4 trillion to annual business revenues. About 75 percent of that value falls
across four areas: customer operations, marketing and sales, software engineering, and research
and development activities.50 In 2018 McKinsey identified about 170 use cases for AI to benefit
humans and society. In another report published in 2024 that number had more than tripled to 600
identified use cases.51A recent MIT study reported that access to ChatGPT boosted productivity of
white-collar workers in the performance of such tasks as writing and cost benefit analyses. It
decreased cycle time by 40 percent and improved quality of work by 18%.52
Leveraged properly, ethically, and responsibly, AI has the potential to transform human existence.
The possibilities and capabilities of AI are huge with the implications for humans and society in
the area of agriculture, banking, climate action, e-commerce,53 telecommunications, disaster
management, education, cybersecurity, finance, fintech, healthcare, justice system, policing, public
service delivery, research, risk management, security, supply-chain management, transportation,
water management, waste management, weather forecast, and work.
The World Economic Forum has noted that AI applications can super-charge sustainable
development by harnessing data, optimizing processes, and kindling innovation. 54 AI can find
solutions to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in such areas as agriculture, climate action,
education, healthcare,55 hunger, poverty, and water management.56 The other side of the balance,
however, is that AI can enhance oil and gas exploration and increase profits but not without the
associated environmental impact. As the use of AI increases so will the demand for more
computing power which raises questions about AI carbon footprint.57 Furthermore, the application
McKinsey June 2023 Report – The Economic Potential of Generative AI (McKinsey, 14 June 2023)
<https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-economic-potential-of-generative-ai-thenext-productivity-frontier > accessed 27 March 2024.
51
McKinsey, “AI for Social Good: Improving Lives and Protecting the Planet” (Mckinsey, 10 May 2024)
<https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/our-insights/ai-for-socialgood?stcr=DB1BB2A89485433581B57A7AE2BD954B&cid=other-eml-alt-mipmck&hlkid=cbeceb487bb84295ae52d452896af950&hctky=15504181&hdpid=e397bf84-33b3-42c3-bca66a3710755a24> accessed 21 May 2024.
52
Zach Winn, “Study finds ChatGPT boosts worker productivity for some writing tasks” (MIT News, 14 July 2023)
<https://news.mit.edu/2023/study-finds-chatgpt-boosts-worker-productivity-writing-0714> accessed 23 November
2023.
53
AI has application in such e-commerce activities as big data analytics, data management, customer insights,
personalisation, marketing, behavioral profiling and targeted advertisements.
54
Claudia Ukonu, “4 ways AI can super-charge sustainable development” (WEF, 13 November 2023)
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/11/ai-sustainable-development/> accessed 4 February 2024
55
Virtual Healthcare Assistants, Robotic Surgery, and Enhanced Cancer diagnostics.
56
UN paper on use of AI for SDGs (IISD, 7 March 2024) < https://sdg.iisd.org/news/un-paper-discussesgovernments-role-in-regulating-and-using-ai-for-the-sdgs/ > accessed April 2024. Damian Eke and others,
“Responsible AI, SDGs, and AI Governance in Africa,” 2022 IST-Africa Conference (IST-Africa) 1
<https://www.academia.edu/89771747/Responsible_AI_SDGs_and_AI_Governance_in_Africa?sm=b > accessed 2
October 2023.
57
Sam Altman and Mark Zuckerberg have hinted that more energy would be required as AI technology evolves.
This could have negative consequences for the environment if the energy/power sector does not transition from
50

8

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

of AI in the management of critical infrastructure and public safety comes with the risk of
cyberattacks and disruptions which may result in blackouts and economic losses. 58 AI has also
been implicated in the perpetuation of bias and discrimination as well as mis and dis information
and the distortion of public discourse and markets. 59
1.2. What is AI Governance?
“AI Governance” has been defined as –
A system of laws, policies, frameworks, practices and processes at international, national
and organizational levels. AI governance helps various stakeholders implement, manage
and oversee the use of AI technology. It also helps manage associated risks to ensure AI
aligns with stakeholders’ objectives, is developed and used responsibly and ethically, and
complies with applicable requirements.60
This definition encompasses the sources, context and purpose of AI governance. AI
governance involves directing, managing, and monitoring AI activities to meet legal and ethical
requirements. On the ethical front, businesses or companies61 are focused on ensuring a high level
of transparency, safety, and security in their AI models to build and maintain customer trust. On
the legal side, companies must conform to legal requirements and satisfy regulators or risk
substantial financial penalties and damaged brand reputation.
Effective AI governance has been described as one that, “provides control and oversight, ensuring
that companies develop and manage their AI services responsibly, ethically, and in compliance
with both internal policies and external regulations in a documented, efficient, and demonstrable
manner.”62
AI governance refers to the imposition of frameworks, rules, standards, and legal requirements
that protect an individual’s fundamental rights including data privacy rights by governing and

carbon-based fossil-fuel to clean renewable energy. Victor Tangermann, “Sam Altman Says AI Using Too Much
Energy, Will Require Breakthrough Energy Source” (Futurism, 17 January 2024) <https://futurism.com/sam-altmanenergy-breakthrough> accessed 19 May 2024. Dwarkesh Patel, “Energy, not compute, will be the #1 bottleneck to
AI progress – Mark Zuckerberg” (YouTube, April 2024) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i-o5YbNfmh0>
accessed 19 May 2024.
58
Dylan Walsh, “Tackling Climate Change and Machine Learning” (MIT Sloan, 24 October 2024)
<https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/tackling-climate-change-machinelearning?utm_source=mitsloangooglep&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=mlclimate&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj
0KCQjwxeyxBhC7ARIsAC7dS38GsdqgsYdLXH8CW-ySDepr9AfjkD45oz_NgaWIDTqHRgG66SJ16kaAn8aEALw_wcB> accessed 15 December 2023.
59
OECD update on AI Principles (OECD.org, 3 May 2024) <https://www.oecd.org/newsroom/oecd-updates-aiprinciples-to-stay-abreast-of-rapid-technological-developments.htm?> accessed 8 May 2024.
60
IAPP – “Key Terms for AI Governance” < https://iapp.org/resources/article/key-terms-for-ai-governance/>
accessed 4 January 2024.
61
Both words are used interchangeably, with “organization(s)” also used on occasion.
62
Securiti Education “AI Governance” <https://education.securiti.ai/certifications/ai-governance/introduction-to-aigovernance/overview-introduction-to-ai-governance/> accessed 2 April 2024.

9

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

managing the use of AI systems. AI governance is key to addressing many concerns associated
with AI, like algorithm bias, data privacy, unethical AI, and impact of AI on humans and society.
Governments all around the world are increasingly drafting specific regulations governing the use
of AI. 63 However, AI systems are also subject to existing data protection laws if those AI systems
involve the processing of personal data.64 A cursory look at these draft AI strategies and
frameworks seems to indicate that the overall goal of most Governments is to regulate AI in such
a way that would not stifle research and development, maximize economic benefits, and mitigate
risk and harm to humans and society. That is not to say that there may be no hidden or venal state
agendas to regulating AI or similar revolutionary technology.65 Hence the need for the involvement
of all stakeholders66 in the development and implementation of AI governance frameworks.
Whatever the choice of approach,67 AI governance should provide clarity and certainty to
companies and consumers about what the “dos and don’ts” are regarding the development and
deployment of AI within a particular jurisdiction.
1.3 Why is AI Governance So Important?
Asking the question, Why is AI Governance Important? is like asking the question, Why is Data
Privacy Important? You would probably arrive at similar answers. This is because there are
intersections between AI and Data Privacy. Aside from the ethical concerns involved in the
development and deployment of AI68 it is in the business interest of organizations to tailor their
operations to promote trust and public confidence, which are a corollary of accountability and
transparency. In view of the increased consumer awareness regarding their data privacy rights, the
recognition of privacy as a fundamental right in the global market,69 growing publicity and media
reports about data breaches and compromises,70 the greater scrutiny of the business practices of
63

International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP) Global AI Law and Policy Tracker,
<https://iapp.org/resources/article/global-ai-legislation-tracker/> accessed 22 March 2024. Tortoise Media’s Global
AI Index, <https://www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/global-ai/#rankings> accessed 17 March 2024. The US,
Canada, China, UK, Nigeria, and Singapore belong to this class of AI aware governments.
64
Like the EU GDPR and the US State of California’s CCPA/CPRA. The EU has a swathe of legislation and guidelines
dealing with data and the digital economy which may also have implication for AI tech companies and gatekeeper
(eCommerce and Social media giants). This is discussed further below.
65
cf. Nuclear technology and weapons of mass destruction.
66
Governments, Developers, Academics, lobby groups, Civil Societies, Consumers, and data subjects.
67
Comprehensive legislation, Industry or Sectoral, and State-controlled approach (n 3).
68
There are concerns about the legality of scraping the internet for data to train AI algorithms, use of AI for automated
decision making in employment or credit/loan applications, autonomous robots/killer drones, real-time facial
recognition for law enforcement and other high risks or prohibited use cases for AI identified by the EU AI Act and
OECD that may harm humans.
69
Post 2013 Edward Snowden revelations, 2016 GDPR enactment and the Brussel Effect which say the explosion of
data protection legislation beyond the European Economic Area (EEA) in over 120 countries globally.
70
For example - GeoCities, Wyndam Hotels & Resort, Eli Lily & Co., Equifax, LabMD, LifeLock, Facebook, Google
and YouTube data breaches resulting in FTC fines and consent decrees. In January 2020, the Italian regulatory
authority fined TIM, a telecom company, €27.9 million for failure to obtain data subjects’ valid consent, aggressive
marketing strategies, and personal data breaches. In December 2020, the French DPA fined Google €100 million and
Amazon €35 million for cookie’s consent violation. In March 2021, the Spanish regulatory authority fined Vodafone
€8.15 million for sending marketing communications without consumer’s consent.

10

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

organizations plus the risk of huge fines and even terms of imprisonment for regulatory
infractions,71 it is expedient for businesses to be compliant with existing laws and policies as they
carry out their domestic and international operations. These laws, international or local, 72 regulate
the privacy rights of data subjects and the activities of organizations that collect, process, share or
sell personal data. AI governance like data privacy governance would provide clarity and sanity in
AI development and deployment. A regulatory framework would ensure ethical, responsible, and
trustworthy AI. A robust AI governance framework would help businesses avoid and mitigate a
number of risks: legal and regulatory risk, reputational risk, operational risk and financial risks.
It addresses ethical concerns and secures business interests by mitigating and managing risks.
Google and Alphabet CEO Sundar Pichai, recently stated while introducing Gemini that:
Every technology shift is an opportunity to advance scientific discovery, accelerate human
progress, and improve lives. I believe the transition we are seeing right now with AI will be
the most profound in our lifetimes, far bigger than the shift to mobile or to the web before it.
AI has the potential to create opportunities — from the everyday to the extraordinary — for
people everywhere. It will bring new waves of innovation and economic progress and drive
knowledge, learning, creativity, and productivity on a scale we haven’t seen before.73
Contrary to the romanticized view presented by many AI developers, AI may not be the benign
super smart assistant or solution to all the problems plaguing humanity. AI, like many life-changing
and revolutionary technologies in history, has a dual use dilemma. AI is not of itself good or bad,
however it is the potential use cases that raise concern. AI in the hands of threat actors or rogue
nations may be deployed to cause harm to humans or society. In my opinion the likelihood of
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) or Super Intelligence acting out a Hollywood-like doomsday
scenario74 is presently less a threat than the actual deployment of specific purpose AI by humans
with deleterious effects. AI and algorithm bias is an identifiable risk and vulnerability in the use
of AI. The same is true of Generative AI’s limitations and difficulties understanding symbolic
reasoning, Industry nuances, misalignment between prompts’ input context and desired output or

The EU GDPR imposes fines as high as 20 million Euros or 4 % of Annual Revenue of a company as penalties for
violation of GDPR Principles. The Brazilian LGPD prescribes fines as high as 2 % of organization’s annual revenue
or $9. 3 million USD (or $50 Million Reais) for violations of the law. Uber CISO was convicted and spared serving
jail time for his involvement in covering up a 2016 data breach involving over 57 million customers and 600,000
drivers. Jai Vijayan, “Judge Spares Former Uber CISO Jail Time Over 2016 Data Breach Charges” (Dark Reading, 5
May 2023) <https://www.darkreading.com/cyberattacks-data-breaches/judge-spares-former-uber-ciso-jail-time-over2016-data-breach-charges.> accessed 7 January 2024.
72
The US is a good example of a decentralized/states-level or Industry specific approach to the regulation of privacy
rights. Various States (e.g., California, Colorado, Delaware, Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey, Virginia,
Washington, Utah et al) and Sectors (Health, Finance, Telecommunications, Education et al) have enacted privacy
laws.
73
Sundar Pichai, “Introducing Gemini: our largest and most capable AI model” (Google Blog, 6 December 2023)
<https://blog.google/technology/ai/google-gemini-ai/#sundar-note> accessed 8 April 2024.
74
Like in the T2 movie franchise and more recently in the Netflix movie “Atlas.”

71

11

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

even generating false information, a phenomenon known as “hallucination.” 75 These flaws clearly
call for human oversight and guardrails76 against misinformation and disinformation or defamation
lawsuits,77 by consumers.
AI and Algorithm Bias and Discrimination
Unscrupulous AI Hiring software developers are promising investors capabilities that their faulty
algorithm fall short of. In the book, “The Algorithm,”78 by Hilke Schellmann, the author talks
about how AI and algorithms79 are now ubiquitous in the hiring, promotion, monitoring and firing
of employees in the world of work. The dawn of robot recruitment has come and gone. 75 to 95
percent of resumes are read by AI before Humans. Every job board from Indeed, Monster,
ZipRecruiter to LinkedIn use some form of AI. Using AI reduces cost, and the human labor
required to sift through the deluge of job applications, hence the mass adoption. AI is now used in
the entire lifecycle of employment from hiring to retiring. AI can be used to determine who is a
flight risk, who is a bully, a high-performer or under-performer. AI can also be used to monitor the
browsing activity and location data of employees.80 The book also points out how biased and faulty
AI unfairly impact a protected class when hiring, promotion or firing decisions are made based on
discriminatory metrics like facial expressions, voice tone, online activity, race, gender, or hobbies
instead of merit and qualifications. Faulty AI Hiring Tools have an intrinsic bias against Women
and African Americans. This is traceable to limited and biased training datasets that perpetuate
stereotypes and discrimination. Employers and Recruiters are using AI Hiring Tools to scan social
media profiles of candidates and make hiring decisions based on information candidates are not
obliged by law to disclose. US labor and employment laws prohibit employment inequality and
discrimination based on age, disability, ethnicity, or sexual orientation.
AI is transforming the world of work, medicine, policing, justice system, banking and finance with
advanced predictive analytics and automated decision making. AI has also been utilized in suicide
This phenomenon has prompted OpenAI to include a disclaimer in its terms of use urging users to verify the veracity
or accuracy of output generated by its product. This is coming on the heels of a defamation lawsuit by a Radio Host
for false legal accusations generated by Open AI’s ChatGPT. Isaiah Poritz “OpenAI Fails to Escape First Defamation
Suit From Radio Host” (Bloomberg Law, 16 January 2024) <https://news.bloomberglaw.com/ip-law/openai-fails-toescape-first-defamation-suit-from-radio-host> accessed 7 April 2024. AI developers are now adopting RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) and Grounding to supplement LLM’s internal information with external, current and
verifiable facts to reduce the risk of incorrect or misleading responses.
76
Technical and regulatory safeguards and countermeasures to avoid or mitigate the identified risk and vulnerabilities.
77
Walters v OpenAI LLC, Ga. Super. Ct., No. 23-A-04860-2, 1/11/24.
78
Hilke Schellmann, The Algorithm (Hachette Books 2024).
79
HireVue a major US based AI Hiring Tool has been called out by critics and AI researchers and condemned the
technology as “profoundly disturbing,” “pseudoscience” and a “license to discriminate.” In its defense HireVue’s
Chief Technology Officer (CTO) has dismissed the criticism as “uninformed” stating that interview candidates are
“getting the same shot regardless of gender, ethnicity, age, employment gaps, or college attended.”
80
This is a serious privacy threat as browsing and location data can reveal a lot about a person’s personal life, including
their religious affiliations, health and medical conditions, financial status, and sexual orientation. See FTC Technology
Blog “FTC Cracks Down on Mass Data Collectors: A Closer Look at Avast, X-Mode, and InMarket” (FTC, 4 March
2024)
<https://www.ftc.gov/policy/advocacy-research/tech-at-ftc/2024/03/ftc-cracks-down-mass-data-collectorscloser-look-avast-x-mode-inmarket> accessed 3 April 2024.
75

12

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

prediction for US military veterans, albeit with allegations of gender bias by the Fuller Project
Report.81 Even universities are now using predictive analytics to determine admission offers and
financial aid.82
The State of Illinois recently passed the “Artificial Intelligence Video Interview Act, 2020”
requiring full disclosure by Employers and informed consent by applicants before the use of AI
Hiring Tools and ensuring that the AI analysis is used in a way that is fair and unbiased.83 New
York also passed the NYC Local Law 144, which came into effect on July 5, 2023. The law requires
employers who use automated employment decision tools (AEDT) in their hiring, firing or
promotion process to confirm that such tools have undergone a “bias audit.”
AI tools may be touted as aimed at reducing the drudgery of repetitive tasks, eliminating human
error and bias and ensuring diversity, equity, and inclusion in certain screening processes but in
reality, AI systems can only be as unbiased as the training data and programming permits. There
could be deliberate or unconscious bias transferred from the developer and data which can be
perpetuated throughout the AI system’s lifecycle. It is important to balance the benefits of the
technology and harm to humans and society. In this context as they impact race and gender, in
particular.84 It is crucial to include human oversight and ethical safeguards.85

Aaron Glantz, “V.A. Uses a Suicide Prevention Algorithm To Decide Who Gets Extra Help. It Favors White Men”
(Markup, 30 May 2024) <https://themarkup.org/news/2024/05/30/v-a-uses-a-suicide-prevention-algorithm-todecide-who-gets-extra-help-it-favors-white-men> accessed 30 May 2024.
82
Rutgers and Rocky Mountain universities were reported as amongst the first to use Student Select’s AI software in
its admission process – Aaron Gifford, “University Admissions Use AI to Gauge Applicant Skills, Traits” (GovTech,
25 April 2023) <https://www.govtech.com/education/higher-ed/university-admissions-use-ai-to-gauge-applicantskills-traits> accessed 3 May 2024; See also Verge AI – “How AI is being used for University Admissions” (Verge
AI, 30 January 2024) <https://verge-ai.com/blog/how-ai-is-being-used-for-university-admissions/> accessed 3 May
2024.
83
cf. In the EU region/EEA GDPR, art 22 prohibits automated decision making and profiling except with the express
consent of the data subject; or necessary for performance of a contract between the data subject and data controller;
or to safeguard the data subject’s rights and freedoms and legitimate interest. GDPR, art 35 also requires a Data
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) to be carried out before embarking on such processing activity. Section 208 of
the E Government Act 2002 requires that all US federal agencies conduct a “privacy impact assessment” (PIA) for all
new or substantially changed technology that collects, maintains, or disseminates personally identifiable information
(PII), or for a new aggregation of information that is collected, maintained, or disseminated using information
technology. Some US State Privacy laws (e.g., California, Colorado, Connecticut, and Virginia) also require a PIA for
activities that pose significant risk and harm to consumer privacy and security. These include targeted ads, sale of PII
and profiling activities that is unfair and deceptive, bias, and discriminatory, or creates risk of financial, reputational,
or physical injury. DPIAs and PIAs are invaluable tools in risk management. They help mitigate risk to the privacy
and security of consumer PII, they boost public confidence and trust in the business, promote accountability and
transparency, and facilitate regulatory compliance.
84
Supreme Court Justice Sotomayor in the Harvard-UNC affirmative action/admission case had noted that the US is
an “endemically segregated society where race has always mattered and continues to matter.” Students for Fair
Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of Harvard College 600 U.S. 181 (2023). Justia U.S. Supreme Court
< https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/600/20-1199/> accessed 17 January 2024.
85
Verge AI, ibid.
81

13

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

AI and Copyrights
Open AI developers of ChatGPT has faced several lawsuits for copyright infringement for using
copyrighted works to train its AI model without permission, thereby causing harm and loss of
revenue. Notable among the lawsuits is the filed by a group of prominent authors, including John
Grisham and George R.R. Martin, in September 2023 and more recently the suit filed by the New
York Times in December 2023 against OpenAI and Microsoft alleging that the company used
millions of its articles in the training and development of its generative AI models, specifically
OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Microsoft’s Bing Chat (or “Copilot”), both built on top of OpenAI’s GPT
model. In its defence OpenAI has pleaded “fair use” of the copyrighted material for the
development of its AI models. Fair use permits a party to use a copyrighted work without the
copyright owner’s permission for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching,
scholarship, or research. However, there are factors to consider, namely whether the nature of the
use is for a commercial or educational purpose; the amount and substantiality of the portion used
in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and the impact of the use on the potential market
or value of the work. These cases underscore the need for clear guidelines and regulations to protect
the intellectual property rights of creatives.
AI Solutions and Dating Sites
AI is also transforming the realm of Sex and Intimacy. There have been an explosion of AI
solutions and dating sites. With the convergence of AI, robotics and virtual reality consumers are
now being offered the possibility of creating bespoke virtual companions or interacting with AI
models of influencers and creators of adult content. Which raises concerns about consent and the
psychological effect on young and inexperienced consumers who may become addicted to and
dependent on their personalized AI partners at the risk of compromising their ability to form
genuine human connections in the real world. Already there are individuals who identify
themselves as “digisexuals,” defining their sexuality based on a preference for online pornography
or cybersex.86
Malicious AI and the Dark Web
A recent article by M Page, a senior fellow at Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI),
highlighted how malicious AI are now available for sale on the dark web. FraudGPT and
WormGPT are examples of the offerings. The author writes –
Just as people around the world have shared tips on using ChatGPT and other AI tools to
enhance efficiency or outsource tasks, dark web users have been sharing tips on how to
jailbreak the technology to get around safety and ethical guardrails or use it for more
sophisticated malicious activity.

Bernard Marr, “Sex and Intimacy In The Generative AI Era” <https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/sex-intimacygenerative-ai-era-bernard-marr-lcdhe/> accessed 6 May 2024.

86

14

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

The first of these tools, WormGPT, appeared on the dark web on 13 July. Marketed as a
‘Blackhat’ alternative to ChatGPT with no ethical boundaries, WormGPT is based on the
open-source GPT-J large-language model developed in 2021. Available in monthly (€100) or
yearly (€550) subscriptions, WormGPT, according to its anonymous seller, has a range of
features such as unlimited character inputs, memory retention and coding capabilities.
Allegedly trained on malware data, its primary uses are generating sophisticated phishing
and business email attacks and writing malicious code. The tool is constantly being updated
with new features, which are advertised on a dedicated Telegram channel.
Hot on WormGPT’s heels, FraudGPT appeared for sale on the dark web on 22 July. The tool—
based on GPT-3 technology—is marketed as an advanced bot for offensive purposes. Its uses
include writing malicious code, creating undetectable malware and hacking tools, writing
phishing pages and scam content, and finding security vulnerabilities. Subscriptions start at
US$200 a month through to US$1,700 for an annual licence.
There are already two new malicious AI tools in the works that represent a giant leap beyond
WormGPT’s and FraudGPT’s capabilities. The creator of FraudGPT is apparently developing
DarkBART—a dark web version of Google’s Bard AI—and DarkBERT, a bot trained on data
from the dark web. Both tools will have internet access and be integrated with Google Lens.
Interestingly, DarkBERT was originally developed by researchers to help fight cybercrime.87
The above developments are indeed scary. The brewing concerns about bias and discrimination,
cyberthreats, misuse and abuse, data privacy and IP rights violations pervading AI development
and deployment call for urgent action to engender a legal and regulatory framework that will
ensure ethical, responsible, and trustworthy AI.
AI and the Three Laws of Robotics
In a perfect world all technology, including AI, is supposed to protect and enhance Human Life
and Society. In 1942, renowned author and scientist, Isaac Asimov proposed “the Three Law of
Robotics”88 which today I surmise should not only apply to robots but to AI, Algorithms and
Machine Learning. They are as follows:
A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come
to harm.
2. The Second Law: A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where
such orders would conflict with the First Law.
1.

87
Mercedes Page, “Malicious AI Arrives on the Dark Web” (ASPI Strategist, 22 August 2023)
<https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/malicious-ai-arrives-on-the-dark-web/> accessed 14 April 2024. See also Tim
Keary, “The Future of Dark AI Tools: What to Expect Next?” (Techopedia, 1 September 2023)
<https://www.techopedia.com/the-future-of-dark-ai-tools-what-to-expect-next> accessed 2 November 2023.
88
The rules were introduced in his 1942 short story “Runaround” (included in the 1950 collection I, Robot).

15

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

3.

The Third Law: A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does
not conflict with the First or Second Law.

Asimov’s Laws have influenced science fiction and have been referenced in many books, films, 89
and other media. They have also influenced thought on ethical and responsible AI.
There have been recent outcry over the development of AI weapons 90 due to their potential to be
more dangerous than human operated weapons. Elon Musk, 91 Steve Wozniak,92 Emad Mostaque,93
John J Hopfield94 and Yuval Noah Harari95 are amongst over 33,000 luminaries who signed an
open letter in March 2023 calling for the halt of the training of powerful AI systems due to the
potential risks and threat to humanity.96
In July 2023, the UN Session on AI acknowledged that AI could be a double-edged sword with
potential for good or bad depending on its use case and the manner in which governments decide
to regulate AI. There was a general call on nations to take an ethical and human-centric approach
to regulating AI, prioritizing human safety and benefits to humans and society. 97
AI and Cyberattacks
In October 2023, the UK government issued a report stating AI might facilitate cyberattacks or aid
terrorists in planning chemical attacks. The report preceded a speech by the UK Prime Minister
presenting the UK government’s plan to make AI safe and establish the UK as a global leader in

The Hollywood movies “I, Robot” and “the Creator” referenced the rule that Robots cannot harm humans.
Autonomous drone weapons/ Killer drones.
91
Founder, Chairman, CEO and CTO Telsa and Space X, Co-founder OpenAI.
92
Co-Founder Apple.
93
Former CEO Stability AI, developers of Stable Diffusion.
94
Princeton University, Professor Emeritus, inventor of associative neural networks.
95
Professor, Historian and Award-winning Author.
96
Future of Life Institute, “Pause Giant AI Experiments: An Open Letter” (Future of Life, March 2023)
<https://futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/> accessed 22 March 2024.
97
UN Meetings Coverage and Press Release – “International Community Must Urgently Confront New Reality of
Generative, Artificial Intelligence, Speakers Stress as Security Council Debates Risks, Rewards” (SC/15359, 18 July
2023) < https://press.un.org/en/2023/sc15359.doc.htm> accessed 22 March 2024.

89

90

16

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

AI safety.98 In August 2021, and December 2023, UK had accused China99 and Russia100 as being
behind state sanctioned cyberattacks aimed at disrupting its electoral process. 101
The US in May 2024 issued a report on its “Cybersecurity Posture” aimed at protecting critical
infrastructure, national security, and economic interests. The report noted that Artificial intelligence is one of the most powerful, publicly accessible technologies of our
time, and its continued evolution in 2023 presented opportunities and challenges for cyber
risk management at scale.102
Obviously, there are growing concerns about cyberattacks and cybersecurity particularly with
rapid developments recorded in AI and related technologies.
Futurists and Technology analysts have noted that with the development of AI, Quantum
Computing and Biotech at breakneck speed the biggest concerns and issues in the next decade
would be increased risk of AI enabled cyberattacks.103
Framing Strategies for AI Governance
The foregoing concerns have not fallen on deaf ears. They have yielded fruits across the globe as
there are concerted efforts internationally, regionally and at the state level to regulate AI. The EU,
OECD, US, UK, Canada, Nigeria, 104 China, Singapore and many countries are working on
strategies and finding appropriate legal frameworks to regulate AI. 105

Chris Vallance, “AI could worsen cyber-threats, report warns” (BBC, 25 October 2023)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-67221117> accessed 17 March 2024. cf. Conversely, AI systems can identify
and react to cybersecurity threats faster than traditional software, improving data protection. AI and ML can enhance
the ability of IDS/IPS to detect and prevent zero-day attacks, advanced persistent threats, and other stealthy techniques
traditional methods may miss.
99
James Gregory and Iain Watson, “China Linked to UK Cyberattacks” (BBC, 25 March 2024)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-politics-68652374> accessed 7 May 2024.
100
Gordon Corera, “Russia Hacking: FSB in Years-long Cyberattacks on UK” (BBC, 7 December 2023)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-politics-67647548> accessed 7 May 2024.
101
A more recent attack is the hacking of the payroll of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) compromising personal data
of Army, RAF, and Navy personnel. Alex Forsyth, “MoD Data Breach” (BBC, 6 May 2024)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-68966497> accessed 7 May 2024.
102
Fact Sheet: 2024 Report on Cybersecurity Posture of the United States (White House, 7 May 2024)
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/oncd/briefing-room/2024/05/07/fact-sheet-cybersecurity-posture-report/> accessed 7
May 2024.
103
Bernard Marr, “The Top Privacy and Security Tech Trends Shaping the Next Decade” (Forbes, 1 May 2024)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2024/05/01/the-top-privacy-and-security-tech-trends-shaping-the-nextdecade/?sh=6f8c43fa6c01> accessed 6 May 2024.
104
Workshop of 120 AI experts to be held 15-18 April 2024 to help formulate Nigeria’s AI Strategy and Policy. See
Website of Federal Ministry of Communications, Innovation and Digital Economy, “Ministry’s Artificial Intelligence
Strategy Workshop to Attract 120 Experts from Across the World” (FMCIDE, posted 3 April 2023)
<https://fmcide.gov.ng/ministrys-artificial-intelligence-strategy-workshop-to-attract-120-experts-from-across-theworld/> accessed 15 April 2024.
105
These are examined in the sections below.
98

17

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

The importance of AI governance is inextricable from its potential benefits and risks. In a nutshell,
uncontrolled or unregulated AI is a recipe for disaster. It can lead to financial loss, reputation
damage, and flawed business decisions.106 A way to guarantee ethical and responsible AI is to bake
in guardrails from the design and development stage to the deployment stage throughout the entire
AI life cycle. An AI governance framework should ensure human oversight and a zero -trust
approach given AI’s potential risk for misuse and unpredictability. Additionally, with the
introduction of the EU AI Act and similar regulations, businesses that proactively implement
responsible AI governance practices will have a competitive advantage over businesses that do
not.107 Proper AI governance promotes trust and public confidence in government and businesses
among consumers and stakeholders.108

You can search over 3000 reports on AI incidents at (AI Incident data base) <https://incidentdatabase.ai/> accessed
1 April 2024.
107
A Guide to AI Governance <https://www.modulos.ai/guide-to-ai-governance/? > accessed 8 May 2024
108
ibid.
106

18

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

2.0 OECD AI Principles
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) is an international
organization that works to build better policies for better lives. 1 The organization harnesses over
sixty years of experience to proffer governments advice on public policy, international best
practices, and standards to tackle social, economic, and environmental challenges and more. 2
The OECD has undertaken empirical and policy activities on AI in support of the policy debate
since 2016, starting with a “Technology Foresight Forum on AI” that year, followed by an
international conference on “AI: Intelligent Machines, Smart Policies” in 2017. The Organization
also conducted other analytical work that demonstrated the need to shape a stable policy
environment at the national and international level to foster trustworthy and safe adoption of AI. 3
The OECD Council adopted the Recommendation at its meeting at Ministerial level on 22-23 May
2019. The OECD AI Principles were adopted in May 2019 on the proposal of the Digital Policy
Committee (DPC, formerly the Committee on Digital Economy Policy, CDEP). They set out a
framework containing ten principles – divided into five values-based principles and five
recommendations to governments.4 The Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence
in 2019 was the first intergovernmental standard on AI.
the OECD Recommendations were revised by the OECD Council meeting at Ministerial level on
3 May 2024 to reflect technological and policy developments, including with respect to generative
AI, and to further facilitate its implementation. The revised principles now directly address AIassociated challenges involving privacy, intellectual property rights, safety, and information
integrity.5 With 47 adherents now including the EU, signing on 2 May 2024, and a general scope
that ensures applicability to AI developments around the world, the OECD AI Principles provide
a blueprint for policy frameworks on how to address AI risks and shape AI policies.6
Scope of Recommendations
The scope of the recommendations is comprised of two main sections:

OECD, “Who we are,” (OECD.org) <https://www.oecd.org/about/> accessed 7 February 2024.
ibid.
3
OECD Legal Instruments, “Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence” (OECD.org, 2 May 2024)
Adopted on: 21/05/2019; Amended on: 02/05/2024 <https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECDLEGAL-0449 > accessed 8 May 2024.
4
OECD AI Principles Overview (OECD AI Policy Observatory) <https://oecd.ai/en/ai-principles> accessed 2 October
2023.
5
See OECD Report, “OECD updates AI Principles to stay abreast of rapid technological developments” (OECD.org,
3 May 2024) <https://www.oecd.org/newsroom/oecd-updates-ai-principles-to-stay-abreast-of-rapid-technologicaldevelopments.htm? > accessed 8 May 2024.
6
OECD Legal Instruments, “Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence” (May 2024) ibid.
1

2

19

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

1. Principles for responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI: the first section sets out five
complementary principles relevant to all stakeholders: i) inclusive growth, sustainable
development, and well-being; ii) respect for the rule of law, human rights, and democratic values,
including fairness and privacy; iii) transparency and explainability; iv) robustness, security, and
safety; and v) accountability.
This section calls on AI actors to promote and implement the principles according to their roles.
AI actors are to engage in trustworthy AI with beneficial outcomes for people and the planet, like
enhancing creativity, reducing social-economic and gender inequity, bias and discrimination, and
protecting the natural environment. AI actors must respect human rights and freedoms, including
privacy and intellectual property rights. Include human oversight in AI systems to address risks of
misuse, misinformation and disinformation. AI actors should be transparent and commit to
disclosure about AI systems their capabilities and limitations, when a consumer is interacting with
AI, sources of data/inputs leading to a prediction, recommendation or decision, and how those
adversely affected can challenge such AI generated content/outputs. There should be safeguards
and mechanisms in place to manage risks and undue harm throughout the AI life cycle. AI actors
are expected to be accountable for the proper functioning of AI systems, allow for traceability and
analysis of datasets and processes, and adopt responsible business conduct. AI actors involved in
different stages of the AI life cycle should collaborate and cooperate towards innovative and
trustworthy AI. 7

2. National policies and international co-operation for trustworthy AI: consistent with the five
aforementioned principles, this section provides five recommendations to Members and nonMembers having adhered to the draft Recommendation (hereafter the “Adherents”) to implement
in their national policies and international co-operation: i) investing in AI research and
development; ii) fostering an inclusive AI-enabling ecosystem; iii) shaping an enabling
interoperable governance and policy environment for AI; iv) building human capacity and
preparing for labour market transformation; and v) international co-operation for trustworthy AI.
The five principles are to guide and form the elements to consider when drafting an AI law or
policy, while the five recommendations are to guide successful implementation of the regulatory
framework adopted.
The OECD AI Principles and allied frameworks/guides have aided the formulation and
implementation of AI Strategies and regulatory frameworks globally. The OECD’s influence is
quite evident in the NIST AI RMF and EU AI Act.

7

ibid.

20

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

OECD AI Policy Observatory
The OECD has a platform, the OECD AI Policy Observatory, which monitors developments in AI
law and policy around the globe. This AI policy tracking repository is a valuable resource for
researchers and policy makers.
The OECD AI Policy Observatory includes a live database of AI strategies, policies, and initiatives
that governments, policymakers and stakeholders can share and update, enabling them interact and
learn from the experiences of one another. It is constantly updated with AI metrics, policies, and
global best practices.
In October 2023, the Observatory published a report on the level of implementation of the OECD
AI Principles globally. In the report the OECD noted that “Overall, over 930 related policy
initiatives across 70 jurisdictions had been reported to the OECD.AI policy hub by May 2023.”8
There are other platforms that monitor the developments in AI law and policy. These include: the
Oxford Insights AI Readiness Index,9 Tortoise Media Global AI Index. 10 and IAPP Global AI Law
and Policy Tracker.11
The Oxford Insights AI Readiness Index which monitors 193 countries notes that “Governments
are not only working to foster AI innovation and establish regulatory frameworks but also striving
to integrate this technology into public services.”12 The Oxford index includes 39 indicators across
10 dimensions, which make up 3 pillars: Government, Technology Sector, and Data &
Infrastructure. The primary research question remains, how ready is a given government to
implement AI in the delivery of public service to its citizens? The US was ranked first and Canada
fifth as at December 2023, with Singapore, UK, and Finland occupying the second, third, and
fourth positions.
The Tortoise Media Global AI Index monitors 62 countries and as at 28 June 2023 ranked the US,
China, Singapore, UK, and Canada among the overall top five countries in AI strategy and
regulation, respectively. The Global AI Index is underpinned by 111 indicators, collected from 28
different public and private data sources, and 62 governments. These are split across seven subpillars: Talent, Infrastructure, Operating Environment, Research, Development, Government
Strategy and Commercial.13

ibid 8 – 12.
<https://oxfordinsights.com/ai-readiness/ai-readiness-index/> accessed 2 January 2024.
10
<https://www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/global-ai/> accessed 23 December 2023.
11
< https://iapp.org/resources/article/global-ai-legislation-tracker/> accessed 22 March 2024 – The IAPP has valuable
articles about AI developments and interactive infographic tools for monitoring AI laws and policies globally.
12
Oxford AI Index ibid.
13
Tortoise Media AI Index ibid.
8

9

21

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

The OECD also has the OECD AI Incident Monitor (AIM). AIM tracks AI incidents in the global
press for valuable insights into existing AI risks. 14
The OECD also has a catalog of metrics and tools for trustworthy AI. The objective is to help AI
actors develop AI systems and applications that adhere to and promote the OECD AI principles
(i.e., respect human rights, fairness, and privacy, are transparent, explainable, robust, secure and
safe).15 The Catalog provides links to educational tools for reskilling or upskilling, 16 Metrics to
measure privacy,17 technical tools to remove bias, 18 tools for robust and secure data collection, 19
AI governance, risk and compliance,20 and AI certifications and quality marks21 among others.22

UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of AI
On 23 November 2021, all the 193 members states of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO adopted the first global standard on AI Ethics, “the
Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence.” The recommendation are comprised of
four core values and ten principles. The Recommendation aims to provide a “globally accepted
normative instrument” that not only focuses on the articulation of values and principles, but also
their practical realization via concrete laws and policies based on a human rights approach to AI
with maximal benefits and minimal risk to humans, society and the environment.23
The four core values are: Respect, protection & promotion of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms and Human Dignity; Living in peaceful, just and interconnected societies; Ensuring
diversity and inclusiveness; and Environment and Ecosystem flourishing.24
The ten principles are:
1. Proportionality and Do No Harm: AI systems should be designed and developed to ensure
proportionality and to do no harm, and to prevent harm to individuals and society. The use of

OECD AIM (OECD.org) <https://oecd.ai/en/incidents> accessed 8 May 2024. The cite reported, inter alia – (i)
concerns about burned out employees’ increased use of AI tools at work to cope with pressure, without the knowledge
of their bosses or proper SETA (security education, training, and awareness), (ii) DOJ is investigating Telsa for alleged
overstating the capabilities of its self-driving cars to unsuspecting public. (ibid).
15
OECD Catalogue of Tools & Metrics for Trustworthy AI (OECD.org) <https://oecd.ai/en/catalogue/overview>
accessed 8 May 2024.
16
Teeny-Tiny Castle.
17
Face Acceptance Rate (FAR) and Face Rejection Rate (FRR).
18
Biaslyze, and Fujitsu LLM Bias.
19
Casebase.
20
Lumenova.
21
CertEye, and Digital Trust Label.
22
ibid.
23
UNESCO Recommendation on AI Ethics, “Aims and Objectives,” 5.
24
UNESCO, “Artificial Intelligence” <https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence?hub=32618> accessed 12
November 2023.
14

22

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

AI systems must not go beyond what is necessary to achieve a legitimate aim. Risk assessment
should be used to prevent harms which may result from such uses.
2. Safety and Security: AI systems should be designed and developed to ensure their safety and
security, and to prevent harm to individuals and society. Unwanted harms (safety risks) as
well as vulnerabilities to attack (security risks) should be avoided and addressed by AI actors.
3. Right to Privacy and Data Protection: AI systems should be designed and developed with
adequate data protection frameworks to ensure data privacy and protection throughout the AI
lifecycle.
4. Fairness and Non-Discrimination: AI systems should be designed and developed to ensure
fairness and non-discrimination, and to prevent bias and discrimination. AI actors should
promote social justice, fairness, and non-discrimination while taking an inclusive approach to
ensure AI’s benefits are accessible to all.
5. Sustainability: AI technologies should be developed and deployed with minimal
environmental impact and to ensure sustainability. AI and AI systems should be assessed
against their impacts on ‘sustainability,’ understood as a set of constantly evolving goals
including those set out in the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.
6. Transparency and Explainability: The ethical deployment of AI systems depends on their
transparency & explainability (T&E). The level of T&E should be appropriate to the context,
as there may be tensions between T&E and other principles such as privacy, safety and
security.
7. Awareness and Literacy: AI systems should be designed and developed to ensure awareness
and literacy, and to provide users with the knowledge and skills needed to understand and
interact with AI systems. Public understanding of AI and data should be promoted through
open and accessible education, civic engagement, digital skills & AI ethics training, media &
information literacy.
8. Responsibility and Accountability: AI systems should be auditable and traceable. There
should be oversight, impact assessment, audit and due diligence mechanisms in place to avoid
conflicts with human rights norms and threats to environmental wellbeing.
9. Human Oversight and Determination: AI systems should be designed, developed and
deployed with mechanisms in place to ensure human oversight and control. Member States
should ensure that AI systems do not displace ultimate human responsibility and
accountability.
10. Multi-stakeholder and Adaptive Governance and Collaboration: International law &
national sovereignty must be respected in the use of data. Additionally, participation of diverse
stakeholders is necessary for inclusive approaches to AI governance.25
As can be seen from the foregoing there are commonalities between the UNESCO
recommendations on the Ethics of AI and the OECD AI principles, namely: data privacy and

25

ibid.

23

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

protection, safety and security, human rights protection, capacity building and training,
international cooperation, transparency and explainability, and accountability.
This is not a coincidence but speaks to the influence of the OECD AI principles in shaping global
AI strategy and policy. This is also true in respect of the NIST AI RMF and EU AI legislation as
shall be seen presently below.

24

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

3.0 NIST AI RMF
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is a non-regulatory agency of the US
Department of Commerce. The agency has its origin in the US Constitution’s grant on Congress
the power “to fix the Standard of Weights and Measures,”1 as well as the establishment of a federal
Superintendent of Weights and Measures in 1836, followed by NIST’s predecessor the National
Bureau of Standards which was founded on 3 March 1901 to provide standard weights and
measures and serve as the national physical laboratory of the US. The agency became the NIST in
1988 with a new mandate to:
Promote U.S. innovation and industrial competitiveness by advancing measurement
science, standards, and technology in ways that enhance economic security and improve
our quality of life. 2
With the evolution of the role of science and technology in the economy and society, so has the
role of NIST evolved at the intersection of government, science and technology, and commerce. It
conducts measurement science, enables standards, and operates advanced laboratories. The NIST
has published a number of standards and frameworks on different subjects, like cybersecurity, risk
management, privacy, including artificial intelligence.
A Framework for Managing AI Risk
In recognition of the potential benefits and risks of AI technologies, the US Congress directed
NIST to come up with a framework. The AI RMF is a product of several months of consultative
and iterative engagements with stakeholders. Between July 2021 to January 2023 NIST held three
workshops and received over 400 comments on the project in October 2021/March 2022 and in
October 2022 from over 240 stakeholders in the Private and Public sector within the US and around
the world.3
The NIST Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF) was published on 26
January 2023. The AI RMF follows the template of previous information risk management and
governance frameworks from NIST, like the Cybersecurity Framework released in 2014 and a
Privacy Framework released in 2020. It has been described as, “a living document” that is
“voluntary, rights-preserving, non-sector-specific, use-case agnostic,” and adaptable to all types
and sizes of organizations.4 The intention is for the framework to be used in the design,
US Const. art. 1, s. 8, cl. 5.
NIST General Information < https://www.nist.gov/director/pao/nist-general-information> accessed 4 February 2024.
3
AI RMF timelines and engagements <https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework> accessed 4 February
2024.
4
Cameron F Kerry, “NIST’s AI Risk Management Framework plants a flag in the AI debate” (Brookings, 23 February
2023)
<https://www.brookings.edu/articles/nists-ai-risk-management-framework-plants-a-flag-in-the-ai-debate/>
accessed 24 February 2024.
1

2

25

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

development, deployment, and use of AI systems to manage risk and promote ethical, responsible,
and trustworthy AI products, services, and systems. The NIST AI RMF is an industry-neutral tool
designed for flexibility and applicability across various disciplines and domains for their different
use cases irrespective of their size or sector. 5 This flexibility and adaptability has also been said
“to be emblematic of Congress’s light-touch approach to AI regulation.” 6
The framework includes ways to manage risk and minimize negative impacts on humans, 7
organizations,8 and the environment.9
The framework is divided into two main parts comprising six sections. Part 1 deals with
Foundational Information, while Part 2 deals with Core and Profiles. The NIST AI RMF adopts
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) recommendations in its
definition of “AI Systems” an engineered or machine-based system that can, for a given set of objectives, generate
outputs such as predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual
environments. AI systems are designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy 10
Part 1 covers: i) Framing Risk, ii) Audience, iii) AI Risks and Trustworthiness, and iv)
Effectiveness of the AI RMF.
Framing Risk
The framework recognizes that risks can emerge in various ways and categories – long term or
short term, high probability, or low probability, systemic or localized, and high impact or lowimpact. Risk can impact or harm humans, society, or the environment. Trustworthy AI systems and
their responsible use can mitigate negative risks and contribute to benefits for people,
organizations, and ecosystems.11 There are challenges to Risk Management, namely: Risk
Measurement; Risk Tolerance; Risk Prioritization; and Organizational Integration and
Management of Risk.
i. Risk Measurement - risks or failures that are not well-defined or adequately understood
are difficult to measure quantitatively or qualitatively.

Video explainer –
<https://www.nist.gov/video/introduction-nist-ai-risk-management-framework-ai-rmf-10-explainer-video> accessed
7 February 2024.
6
Hadrien Pouget and Matt O'Shaughnessy, “Reconciling the U.S. Approach to AI” (Carnegie Endowment, 3 May
2023) <https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2023/05/reconciling-the-us-approach-to-ai?lang=en> accessed 4
May 2024.
7
Threats to civil liberties and democratic values, bias and discrimination, access to employment, education, or
economic opportunities.
8
Security breach, reputational risk, business, and operational risk.
9
Supply chain, natural resources, or global financial systems.
10
Adapted from: OECD Recommendation on AI:2019; ISO/IEC 22989:2022.
11
AI RMF, 4-5.

5

26

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

ii. Risk Tolerance - the level of risk an entity is willing to assume to achieve a desired
result. In the case of business entities, it is the risk that is tolerable or acceptable to an
organization as the “cost of doing business.” Risk threshold, risk appetite, and acceptable
risk are terms used synonymously with “risk tolerance.”
iii. Risk Prioritization - Policies and resources should be prioritized based on the assessed
risk level and potential impact of an AI system. Any residual risks (i.e., risk remaining after
risk treatment) must be documented by the AI system provider and end-users should be
informed about the potential negative impacts of interacting with an AI system. 12
iv. Organizational Integration and Management of Risk - AI risks should not be considered
in isolation. AI risk management should be integrated and incorporated into broader
enterprise risk management strategies and processes.13 Treating AI risks along with other
critical risks, such as cybersecurity and privacy, will yield a more integrated outcome and
organizational efficiencies. For risk management to be effective, organizations must
establish and maintain the necessary procedures for accountability, assign roles and duties,
and foster an awareness culture and an incentive structure. 14
Audience
The framework is intended for “AI Actors” which include those involved in the design,
development, deployment, and use of AI systems. This is representative of AI Actors across AI
lifecycle15 and key dimensions.16 AI actors are defined by the OECD as “those who play an active
role in the AI system lifecycle, including organizations and individuals that deploy or operate
AI.”17 The NIST AI RMF references the OECD framework on the Classification of AI Systems in
determining the audience of AI, looking at actors across socio-technical dimensions and lifecycle
as this is vital to allocating accountability. 18
Trustworthy AI
The NIST AI RMF notes the essential building block for reducing negative AI risk and enhancing
trustworthy AI:

AI RMF, 7-8.
i.e., the process of identifying, evaluating, and controlling threats, including all the phases of risk context (or
framing), risk assessment, risk treatment (accepting, avoiding, mitigating, sharing, or transferring risk), and risk
monitoring.
14
AI RMF, 8.
15
Plan and Design; Collect and Process Data; Build and Use Model; Verify and Validate; Deploy and Use; Operate
and Monitor.
16
Application Context; Data and Input; AI Model; Task and Output.
17
OECD (2019) Artificial Intelligence in Society—OECD iLibrary.
18
AI RMF, 4-12.
12

13

27

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

1) Validity and Reliability; 2) Safety; 3) Security and Resiliency; 4) Accountability and
Transparency; 5) Explainability and Interpretability; 6) Privacy- enhanced; and 7)
Fairness with Mitigation of Harmful Bias 19
1) Validity and Reliability – AI systems should be designed to perform validly and reliably
throughout their lifecycle. Training datasets should be accurate and valid and there should be
mechanisms for monitoring and testing performance during the AI lifecycle.
2) Safety - AI systems should “not under defined conditions, lead to a state in which human life,
health, property, or the environment is endangered.”20
3) Security and Resiliency - AI systems should maintain confidentiality, integrity, and availability
through implementation of security controls. The NIST Cyber Security Framework and Risk
Management Framework are applicable here.
4) Accountability and Transparency – There should be information about the risks, capabilities
and outputs of AI systems at different stages of the AI lifecycle, tailored to the knowledge or role
of the individual interacting with the system. This enhances auditability and compliance.
5) Explainability and Interpretability – There should be information about how the AI system
functions and why it gave a specific output. This is intended to address the “black box” problem
associated with AI.21
6) Privacy- enhanced – AI systems should be designed, developed and deployed in a manner that
protects the rights and freedoms of individuals and addresses privacy related risks. The NIST
Privacy Framework is applicable here.22
7) Fairness with Mitigation of Harmful Bias – AI systems be designed, developed and deployed
in a manner that ensures equality and equity and addresses concerns about harmful bias and
discrimination to a group or an individual.23
These principles are similar to the OECD AI principles. They encompass key issues like safety,
privacy and security, bias, explainability, accountability and transparency.

Effectiveness of the AI RMF
Users of the AI RMF are encouraged to periodically evaluate its effectiveness in improving their
ability to manage AI risks, as well as policies, processes, practices, implementation plans,
indicators, measurements, and expected outcomes. NIST intends to work collaboratively with
AI RMF, 12.
AI RMF, 14.
21
AI RMF, 16-17.
22
AI RMF, 17.
23
AI RMF, 17.
19

20

28

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

stakeholders to develop metrics, methodologies, and goals for evaluating the efficacy of the AI
RMF and to share such resources widely. 24

Part 2 covers: i) AI RMF Core, and ii) AI RMF Profiles.
Core
Part 2 comprises the “Core” of the Framework. It describes four specific functions to help
organizations address the risks of AI systems in practice. These functions – Govern, Map, Measure,
and Manage – are broken down further into categories and subcategories. While Govern applies
to all stages of organizations’ AI risk management processes and procedures, the Map, Measure,
and Manage functions can be applied in AI system-specific contexts and at specific stages of the
AI lifecycle.
Profiles
AI RMF use-case profiles are implementations of the AI RMF functions, categories, and
subcategories for a specific setting or application based on the requirements, risk tolerance, and
resources of the Framework user. AI RMF profiles assist organizations in deciding how they might
best manage AI risk that is well-aligned with their goals, considers legal/regulatory requirements
and best practices, and reflects risk management priorities. 25
Examples of Profiles are temporal or cross-sectoral profiles.
AI RMF temporal profiles are descriptions of either the current state or the desired, target state of
specific AI risk management activities within a given sector, industry, organization, or application
context.26
AI RMF cross-sectoral profiles cover risks of models or applications that can be used across use
cases or sectors.27

AI RMF Playbook and Other Key Developments
A companion NIST AI RMF Playbook 28 has also been published by NIST along with an AI RMF
Roadmap, AI RMF Crosswalk, and various Perspectives. Since the framework is a product of
collaborative efforts and engagements with stakeholders, such collaboration is ongoing and
encouraged by NIST. Developers, deployers, researchers and experts from academia, users from
AI RMF, 19.
AI RMF, 33.
26
ibid.
27
ibid.
28
NIST AI RMF Playbook <https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework/nist-ai-rmf-playbook>
accessed 24 February 2024.
24

25

29

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

the private and public sector are encouraged to provide feedback, evaluations and profiles
regarding the AI Framework and experiences implementing the approaches in the framework.
On 30 March 2023, NIST launched the Trustworthy and Responsible AI Resource Center, to
inventory all feedback and facilitate implementation and international alignment with the AI RMF.
In 2023 Meta’s Open Loop Program29 launched its first policy prototyping research program in the
US to test the NIST AI RMF for clarity, implementability and effectiveness in aiding companies
to identify and manage risks arising from generative AI.
The program gives participating companies the opportunity to learn about NIST's AI RMF, and to
understand how it can be applied to managing risks associated with developing and deploying
generative AI systems. At the same time, the program will gather evidence on current practices
and provide valuable insights and feedback to NIST, which can inform future iterations of the AI
RMF.30
On 8 February 2024, NIST established the AI Safety Institute (AISI). The mission of the AISI will,
initially, include projects aimed at advancing research and measurement science for AI safety,
conducting safety evaluations of models and systems, and developing guidelines for evaluations
and risk mitigations, including content authentication and the detection of synthetic content. These
would be modified as the global AI landscape changes. The AISI will collaborate with
representatives of industry, academia, civil society and government towards achieving its goal of
responsible, safe and trustworthy AI that benefits humans and the planet.31
On 29 April 2024, NIST published a draft AI RMF Generative AI Profile to aid organizations in
identifying unique risks associated with GenAI and suggested measures for managing those risks
best aligns with their business goals and interests. 32

ISO AI Standard 42001
The ISO/IEC 42001 (ISO 42001)33 is a voluntary standard on managing AI risks and opportunities
published on December 18, 2023, by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and
the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). The standard provides guidance, on ethical,

Open Loop is a global initiative that connects tech companies and policymakers with the aim of developing effective
and evidence-based policies around new technology, particularly AI. Supported by Meta, Open Loop brings together
regulators, governments, tech companies, academics, and civil society representatives. Together, they co-create policy
prototypes and test new and different approaches to laws and regulations before they are enacted.
30
https://openloop.org/
31
NIST, “US Artificial Intelligence Safety Institute” <https://www.nist.gov/aisi> accessed 27 May 2024.
32
ibid. See also AI RMF <https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework> accessed 4 February 2024.
33
ISO/IEC 42001: 2023 “Information technology - Artificial intelligence - Management system” (ISO, 2023)
<https://www.iso.org/standard/81230.html> accessed 7 June 2024.
29

30

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

privacy and security concerns, to organizations engaged in the design, development, and
deployment of AI systems.
The ISO 42001 has several annexes:
▪
▪
▪
▪

Annex A: Management guide for AI system development, including a list of controls.
Annex B: Implementation guidance for the AI controls listed in Annex A, including data
management processes.
Annex C: AI-related organizational objectives and risk sources.
Annex D: Domain- and sector-specific standards.

The key themes and requirements of the standard include:
▪

▪
▪
▪
▪
▪

Leadership: there should be management buy-in and commitment to the AI management
system (AIMS) with policies and procedures that align with the overall goals and objectives
of the organization.
Planning: the risks and opportunities associated with AI should be identified and assessed
with a robust framework and plan for addressing them.
Support: provide adequate resources and support to the AIMS, including training and
awareness across the organization.
Operation: establish sustainable processes and procedures for the development,
deployment, and maintenance of AI systems.
Performance evaluation: monitor, measure, analyze, and evaluate the performance of AI
systems and undertake corrective measures when and where necessary.
Continual improvement: continually improve the AIMS and ensure that it remains
current, relevant and efficient.

As the AI landscape continues to evolve businesses and organizations engaged in AI development
and deployment are encouraged to embrace frameworks and standards like the NIST AI RMF and
the ISO 42001 to foster public trust and success in the long-term.34

“Understanding ISO 42001: The World’s First AI Management System Standard” (A-LIGN) < https://www.align.com/articles/understanding-iso-42001 > accessed 7 June 2024.
34

31

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

4.0 EU AI Act
The European Union’s Artificial Intelligence Act is the first comprehensive legislation on AI. It
takes a balanced approach to AI governance by taking cognizance of the potential benefits and
risks of AI to humans and society. The AI Act seeks to provide legal certainty, promote investment
and innovation, ensure respect for existing laws on fundamental rights and EU values and facilitate
a single market.1 The AI Act also adopts a human-centric and risk-based approach in achieving
safe and trustworthy AI with phased implementation over a 6-to-24-month period.
The EU AI Act aims to establish a common legal and regulatory framework for AI. It was proposed
by the European Commission on 21 April 2021 and, after much deliberation and consultative
sessions, was passed by the European Parliament on 13 March 2024 and the EU Council on 21
May 2024, respectively.
4.1 Highlights and Essential Provisions of the EU AI Act.
A. Subject matter and Scope (Cap I, arts 1 and 2)
Article 1(1) provides that the purpose of the AI Act is to improve the functioning of the internal
market and promote human-centric and trustworthy AI, while ensuring a high level of protection
of health, safety, fundamental rights, democracy, rule of law, the environment and supporting
innovation. Article 1(2) further provides that the AI Act lays down harmonised rules for the placing
of AI on the market, putting into service or use within the Union; Prohibition of certain AI; and
specific rules and requirements for High-risk AI; General- Purpose AI; and certain AI systems.
Article 2 (a) to (g) lists the scope of operators to whom the AI Act applies as: providers, deployers,
importers, distributors, product manufacturers, and authorized representatives. The AI Act also
applies to AI Actors outside the union who place AI systems within the union or where output of
their AI systems are used in the Union.
The extraterritorial applicability of the AI Act raises strategic and operational questions for
multinational organizations. They would have to decide whether to adopt the EU AI Act standards
globally, develop or use EU-specific AI systems and models, or scale back AI operations in the EU
altogether.2

Explanatory Memorandum, (1. Context of the Proposal, 1.1 Reasons for and Objectives of the Proposal) Proposal
for a Regulation Of The European Parliament And Of The Council Laying Down Harmonized Rules On Artificial
Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) And Amending Certain Union Legislative Acts - {SEC (2021) 167 final} {SWD (2021) 84 final} - {SWD (2021) 85 final} (EUR-Lex, 21 April 2021) <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52021PC0206 > accessed 14 March 2024.
2
Suchitra Nair and Valeria Gallo, “EU AI Act: the finish line is in sight” (Deloitte, 10 June 2024)
<https://www.deloitte.com/uk/en/services/legal/blogs/the-eu-ai-act-the-finish-line-is-in-sight.html> accessed 12
June 2024.
1

32

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

B. Definitions (art 3)
Article 2(1)(e) defines product manufacturers as persons placing AI system(s) on the market under
their name or trademark.
Article 3 contains the definition of terms used in the AI Act. Article 3 defines providers, deployers,
importers, distributors, and authorized representatives as follows:
i.

ii.

iii.

iv.
v.

Providers - means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body that
develops an AI system or a general-purpose AI model or that has an AI system, or a generalpurpose AI model developed and places it on the market or puts the AI system into service
under its own name or trademark, whether for payment or free of charge. 3
deployers - means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body using
an AI system under its authority except where the AI system is used in the course of a
personal non-professional activity. 4
importers - means a natural or legal person located or established in the Union that places
on the market an AI system that bears the name or trademark of a natural or legal person
established in a third country;5
distributors - means a natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the provider
or the importer, that makes an AI system available on the Union market;6
authorized representatives – means a natural or legal person located or established in the
Union that places on the market an AI system that bears the name or trademark of a natural
or legal person established in a third country.7

C. Risk-Based Approach
The AI Act has four major risk categories with varied assessments requirements, documentation,
and obligations to be performed by AI Actors during the AI life cycle. These include Unacceptable Risk; High Risk; Limited Risk; and Minimal Risk.
A fifth category General Purpose Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) was added during the trilogue
negotiations.
I.

Prohibited AI Practices (Cap II, art 5) – The following are unacceptable AI risks and
therefore constitute prohibited AI which are required to be banned 6 months after the
regulation comes into effect. These include the placing on the market, the putting into
service, or the use of an AI system:
i.
that deploys subliminal, manipulative, or deceptive techniques.
ii.
that exploits vulnerabilities.

art 3(3).
art 3(4).
5
art 3(6).
6
art 3(7).
7
art 3(5).
3

4

33

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.

II.

for social scoring
for predictive policing
that creates or expands facial recognition databases.
that infers emotions in workplaces or educational institutions.
that use biometric categorisation systems.
for ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification (RBI) in publicly accessible
spaces for purposes of law enforcement, except in serious crimes like kidnap,
murder, terrorism, child pornography, human and drug trafficking, et al.

High Risk (Cap III, Sec 1, art 6) – There are two categories of high-risk AI under Article 6
of the Act:
(i) AI systems used as a safety component of a product (or otherwise subject to EU health
and safety harmonization legislation); and
(ii) AI systems deployed in eight specific use cases, listed in Annex III, these include:
▪ permissible biometric,
▪ critical infrastructure,
▪ education and vocational training,
▪ employment workers management and access to self-employment,
▪ access to essential public and private services and benefits,
▪ law enforcement,
▪ migration asylum and border control management, and
▪ the administration of justice and democratic processes.
Articles 49 and 71 provide that AI systems and their providers (or where applicable, the
authorized representative) must be registered in an EU database before being placed on the
market or put into service. High risk AI systems must comply with an array of requirements
contained in Chapter III, Section 2 namely: Compliance with the Requirements (art 8);
Risk Management System (art 9); Data and Data Governance (art 10); Technical
Documentation (art 11); Record-Keeping (art 12); Transparency and Provision of
Information to Deployers (art 13); Human Oversight (art 14); Accuracy, Robustness and
Cybersecurity (art 15).8
Article 27 of the AI Act, introduced by European Parliament, requires the completion of a
fundamental rights impact assessment (FRIA) for high-risk AI used by public entities or
private entities providing public services, such as banks and insurance companies. If, for
these deployers, a data protection impact assessment already exists under the GDPR, the
DPIA will be an integral part of the FRIA.

arts 8-15. Some of these requirements and documentation are also found in other EU legislation. This is in keeping
with the harmonised standards, directives and regulations for the EU single market. For example, the conformity
assessment is to ensure products meet safety, health and environmental standards before they are placed on the market.
8

34

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

III.

Limited Risk (art 50) - Providers and deployers of AI systems with limited risks are subject
to fewer transparency obligations save for the requirement to ensure that end-users are
aware that they are interacting with AI (as in the case of chatbots and deepfakes).
Providers shall ensure that AI systems intended to interact directly with natural persons are
designed and developed in such a way that the natural persons concerned are informed that
they are interacting with an AI system.9
Providers of AI systems, including general-purpose AI systems, generating synthetic audio,
image, video or text content, shall ensure that the outputs of the AI system are marked in a
machine-readable format and detectable as artificially generated or manipulated.10

IV.

V.

Minimal Risk – Any AI system not caught by the above are of low or minimal risk. AI
systems do not have specific obligations or requirements under the EU AI Act. No
additional measures are needed in minimal risk cases, such as spam filters.
General-Purpose AI (GPAI) – (Cap V, Secs 1 -3, arts 51 -56) - There is an obligation to
keep records for general-purpose AI, including records on any copyrighted data used as
part of the training data, but general-purpose AI will not necessarily be considered high
risk unless it also falls within the relevant categories for high risk.
GPAI will be considered a systemic risk if it carries a specific risk that has a significant
impact on the EU market due to its scale, or actual or reasonably foreseeable adverse effects
on public health, security or fundamental rights. GPAI will also be considered a systemic
risk if it has a computational power greater than 10^25 floating point operations 11 or so
deemed by the EU AI Office, which will be responsible for such assessments.
Providers of such models will be subject to a number of additional obligations. These
include conducting an assessment to identify and mitigate systemic risk, analyzing and
mitigating such risks, and documenting and reporting serious incidents. These providers
will also have to ensure an adequate level of cybersecurity protection regarding the model
and its physical infrastructure.

D. Exemptions to Scope of the AI Act
Article 2 (2)-(12) provides various exemptions to the AI Act. It shall not apply to:
i.

AI systems used exclusively for military, defence or national security purposes, 12

art 50(1).
art 50(2).
11
These include foundational models that use large datasets and computing power to train. ChatGPT, GPT4.o and
Gemini are examples.
12
art 2(3).

9

10

35

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

ii.

iii.
iv.
v.

AI systems used by public authorities in a third country and international organizations to
fulfill international cooperation frameworks or agreements for law enforcement and
judicial cooperation with the EU or one or more of its member states, 13
AI systems or AI models, including their output, specifically developed and put into service
for the sole purpose of scientific research and development, 14
deployers who are natural persons using AI systems in the course of a purely personal nonprofessional activity,15 and
AI systems released under free and open-source licences, unless they are placed on the
market or put into service as high-risk AI systems or as an AI system that falls under Article
5 or 50.16

E. Penalties (art 99)
Member States are required to lay down rules for penalties and enforcement measures for
violations of the Act. The penalties must be effective, proportionate, and dissuasive, and take into
account the interests and economic viability of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and
startups.
The Penalties range from €7.5 to €35 million Euros and 1% to 7% of turnover:
(i) the higher of €35,000,000 Euro or up to 7 percent of a company’s total worldwide annual
turnover for non-compliance with prohibited AI practices;17
(ii) Non-compliance with any of the following provisions18 related to operators or notified bodies,
other than those laid down in Articles 5, shall be subject to administrative fines of up to €15,000,
000 Euro or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 3 % of its total worldwide annual turnover for
the preceding financial year, whichever is higher;19 or
(iii) the higher of €7,500,000 Euro or up to 1 percent of a company’s total worldwide annual
turnover for the supply of incorrect, incomplete, or misleading information to notified bodies and
national competent authorities.20
F. Timelines
Article 113 provides that the AI Act will enter into force 20 days following its publication in the
Official Journal of the European Union and will apply after 24 months. However, the
implementation of different parts of the Act with be in phases over a period of 6 to 36 months:

art 2(4).
art 2(6).
15
art 2(10).
16
art 2(12).
17
art 99(3).
18
arts 16, 22, 23, 24, 26, 31, 33, 34, 50.
19
art 99(4).
20
art 99(5).
13

14

36

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

i. Chapters I and II which deal with Prohibited AI will apply six months after the Act comes
into effect.
ii. Chapter III Section 4 (Notifying Authorities and Notified Bodies), Chapter V (General
Purpose AI [GPIA]), Chapter VII (Governance) and Chapter XII (Penalties) and Article
78 (Confidentiality of information and data), with the exception of Article 101(Fines
for providers of GPIA); will be applied after 12 months.
iii. Article 6(1) (High risk AI systems under Annex I) will be applied after 36 months.
Article 56 provides that Codes of practice shall be ready at the latest nine months from the date of
entry into force of the Act. If the codes of practice are not ready or deemed inadequate within a
year, the Commission may create common rules.
G. Governance Architecture
The AI Acts sets up a framework for regulation and enforcement through a combination of
authorities and few governing bodies:
▪
▪
▪
▪

AI Office – An office within the Commission to enforce the common rules across the
Union.21
AI Board – a body comprised of representatives of member states to advise and assist the
Commission and member states on consistent and effective application of the AI Act.22
Advisory forum – a platform for stakeholders to provide technical expertise to the AI
Board and the Commission.23
Panel of Experts - A panel of independent scientific experts to support enforcement
activities.24

art 64.
art 65.
23
art 67.
24
art 68.

21

22

37

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

5.0 Other Global Trends
The global landscape of AI strategy and regulation is an alphabet soup of Laws, Principles,
Standards and Frameworks. We have already examined three major examples (OECD AI
Principles, NIST AI RMF and EU AI Act) in the preceding portions of this paper. Let us now
proceed to examine them at a national level from different regions across the globe.
UNITED STATES (US)
The US approach to AI regulation is Market and Industry driven as noted above. US lacks a
flagship legislation like the EU AI Act. 1 It is a patchwork of standards and frameworks and State
level legislation in respect of employment, policy or AEDT with intersections with privacy, bias
and ethics.2
US is a party to the OECD AI principles issued in 2019. In November 2021 US also adopted
UNESCO's Recommendation on the Ethics of AI. US also participated in the November 2023
U.K. AI Summit, which led to the Bletchley Declaration. US as part of the G7 endorsed the 11
Hiroshima Process International Guiding Principles for Advanced AI systems.
The Tortoise Media 2023 Global AI Index ranked US first place ahead of China, Singapore, UK,
and Canada.3 Curiously the Tortoise Index ranked the US first place in respect of “talent” and
eighth place for “government strategy,” while Saudi Arabia4 was ranked first place on
“government strategy” but fifty-third for “talent” and given an overall ranking of thirty-first place
out of 62 countries ranked. The Oxford Insights’ 2023 AI Readiness Index also ranked US first
place, among 193 nations ranked, using three main pillars: Government; Technology; and Data &
Infrastructure.5

The American Data Privacy and Protection Act is still in draft form.
AI Training for the Acquisition of Workforce Act; the Algorithmic Accountability Act; AI in Government Act;
National AI Initiative Act; Title VII of the Civil Rights Act; Age Discrimination in Employment Act; Fair Credit
Reporting Act; Genetic Information and Non-discrimination Act (GINA); Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA), FTC Act and HIPAA, et al.
3
the Global AI index <https://www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/global-ai/#rankings> accessed 27 May 2024.
4
Saudi Arabia launched its National Data and AI Strategy in 2020 and aims to be a global leader in AI by 2030. The
strategy adopted the OECD AI principles and covers the following policy areas: Competition, Digital economy,
Education, Employment, Innovation, Investment, Science and technology, Social and welfare issues. See OECD AI
Policy Observatory <https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards/policy-initiatives/http:%2F%2Faipo.oecd.org%2F2021-datapolicyInitiatives-26934> accessed 19 May 2024.
5
Oxford Insight, AI Readiness Index < https://oxfordinsights.com/ai-readiness/ai-readiness-index/> accessed 22
April 2024.
1

2

38

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

Blueprint for AI Bill of Rights
The NIST AI RMF, examined above, and the Blueprint for AI Bill of Rights are emblematic of
US AI strategy. 6 The Blueprint in recognition of the benefits and potential risks of AI technology
sets out non-binding ethics and civil rights-based principles for the use of AI. In furtherance of this
objective the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy identified five guiding
principles for the design, use, and deployment of AI systems: Safe and Effective Systems;
Algorithmic Discrimination Protections; Notice and Explanation; Human Alternatives,
Consideration, and Fallback; and Data Privacy.7
Voluntary Commitments by AI companies
In July 2023, the US President obtained voluntary commitments from seven leading AI
companies to manage AI risks.8 The companies are Amazon, Anthropic, Google, Inflection, Meta,
Microsoft, and OpenAI. The commitment underscores safety, security, and trust as critical steps
toward developing responsible AI.
Executive Order
On 30 October 2023 the US President, Joe Biden, issued an Executive Order calling for “Safe”
and “Trustworthy” development and deployment of AI in the US.9 The Executive Order contains
directives, on the development of new standards for AI safety and security and the establishment
of an advanced cybersecurity program. It also covers key issues like data privacy and protection,
bias and discrimination, job creation and protection, ethical and responsible AI, equity and civil
rights, consumer protection, AI training and awareness in public service, health care and education,
promotion of AI research and innovation, International alliances and cooperation.10
US State Laws
As noted earlier there have been some legislation on AI in the US at the States-level. Some of these
include the 2021 New York City Local Law 144 which requires employers who use automated
employment decisions tools to undergo a “bias audit.”

6
Hadrien Pouget and Matt O’Shaughnessy, “Reconciling the US Approach to AI” (Carnegie Endowment, 3 May
2023) <https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2023/05/reconciling-the-us-approach-to-ai?lang=en> accessed 13
May 2024.
7
The White House, “Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights: Making Automated Systems Work for the American People”
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/ai-bill-of-rights/> accessed 13 ay 2024.
8
The White House “Fact Sheet: Biden-Harris Administration Secures Voluntary Commitments from Leading
Artificial Intelligence Companies to Manage the Risks Posed by AI” <https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefingroom/statements-releases/2023/07/21/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-secures-voluntary-commitments-fromleading-artificial-intelligence-companies-to-manage-the-risks-posed-by-ai/ > accessed 11 May 2024.
9
The White House, “Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial
Intelligence” <https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2023/10/30/executive-order-on-thesafe-secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artificial-intelligence/> accessed 13 May 2024.
10
ibid.

39

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

The State of Illinois also passed the AI Video Interview Act in 2020, which requires full disclosure
by employers and informed consent by applicants before the using AI Hiring Tools which must
entail a fair and unbiased process.
The Utah AI Policy Act (Senate Bill 149), was signed into law by Governor Spencer Cox on 13
March 2024, and came into effect on 1 May 2024.The law aims to regulate the use of generative
AI, promote consumer protection regarding AI and creates the Office of AI Policy (OAIP). The
OAIP is charged with the responsibility of creating and administering the State’s AI learning
laboratory program, make rules related to the program and provide guidance on AI-related matters
to inform the State’s AI regulatory framework.11
On 17 May 2024, the Colorado Artificial Intelligence (AI) Act, also known as Senate Bill 24-205
was signed into law by Colorado Governor Jared Polis. This is the first comprehensive AI
legislation by a US State. The law will come into effect on 1 February 2026.
The law regulates developers and deployers of high-risk AI systems and gives the attorney general
exclusive enforcement powers. The law also imposes obligations on AI developers and deployers
regarding transparency and disclosure, documentation, impact assessment and risk management.
They must also take reasonable care to protect individuals from the risk of “algorithmic
discrimination” which is defined as “conditions in which the use of AI results in unlawful treatment
or disfavors an individual or group.”12
FTC Guidelines and Enforcement Action
The failure of companies to address AI risks as they relate to data privacy and protection, privacy
rights, bias and discrimination, and automated decision-making tools causing harm to the public
has been the subject of enforcement actions by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The FTC
under section 5 of its enabling law, the FTC Act has the power to bring enforcement actions against
companies for unfair, deceptive and abusive actions.13
In December 2023, the FTC banned Rite Aid from using its “AI facial recognition security system”
after it falsely tagged customers in December 2023.14 The AI system was used for predictive
policing to identify patrons deemed likely to shoplift or engage in other criminal behavior. Despite
countless false positives and deficiencies Rite Aid utilized it for 8 years resulting in undue harm
to customers. Incidentally, the new EU AI Act classifies such AI systems under “unacceptable risk”
and prohibits it.

Utah State Legislature, “Artificial Intelligence Policy Act” <https://le.utah.gov/~2024/bills/static/SB0149.html>
accessed 1 June 2024.
12
Colorado General Assembly “Consumer Protection for Artificial Intelligence” <Consumer Protections for
Artificial Intelligence | Colorado General Assembly> accessed 1 June 2024.
13
The FTC was originally set up in 1914 to enforce anti-trust laws.
14
Rite Aid Corporation, FTC v. <https://www.ftc.gov/legal-library/browse/cases-proceedings/2023190-rite-aidcorporation-ftc-v> accessed 3 May 2024.
11

40

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

In July 2023, the FTC required Amazon to overhaul its data deletion practices following allegations
that its Alexa voice assistant violated COPPA.15
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has also issued guidelines and conducted workshops on AI.
These are aimed to curb unfair competition and build capacity and raise awareness around AI
development and deployment. The FTC website is awash with resources on AI.16
AI lawsuits in the US Courts
The judicial landscape in the US has not been spared the effects of the AI ague. This is owed in
part to the array of lawsuits against one particular AI company, Open AI. Little known by the public
until a few years ago, when it released ChatGPT its ground-breaking generative AI model that
sparked an AI revolution in the GenAI field. Open AI has been sued for by the New York Times
and a group of leading Authors for copyright infringement,17 false accusation and defamation via
output generated by its ChatGPT model 18 and more recently risks a potential lawsuit from actor
Scarlett Johansson for violation of publicity rights19 via its latest AI voice assistant model named
“Sky.” Open AI had approached Johansson to voice its AI model in September 2023, but she
declined for personal reasons. Nine months later the company released the new AI model, which
sounded eerily similar to Johansson’s voice. The company claimed that it had hired a voice actor.
Ultimately OpenAI pulled the voice down after much public outcry and increased scrutiny. 20
Open AI has been accused of training its AI models with copyrighted material, scraped from the
internet, without consent of the copyright owners. Open AI has pleaded “fair use” in its defense.
In 2023 Stability AI was sued in the UK and US by Getty for using its images without permission
to train its GenAI model, Stable Diffusion.
It must be noted that these cases are poised to deepen the US jurisprudence in the area of privacy
and intellectual property. It also underscores the need for clear guidelines and regulations to protect
privacy and IP rights as they relate to AI.
UNITED KINGDOM (UK)
As seen in the introductory sections above, the UK has a rich history in AI development, dating
back to the Difference Engine designed by Charles Babbage in the 1820s; Alan Turing’s code
breaking work on the Enigma Machine during the second world war (WWII) and his seminal 1950
paper “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” proposing the “Turing Test” or “Imitation Game,”
Amazon.com (Alexa) US, v. <https://www.ftc.gov/legal-library/browse/cases-proceedings/192-3128-amazoncomalexa-us-v> accessed 29 April 2024.
16
See FTC <https://search.ftc.gov/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&affiliate=ftc_prod&query=AI&commit=Search >
accessed 2 June 2024.
17
NYT v Open AI; and RR Martin & Ors v Open AI.
18
Walter v Open AI.
19
Unlawful use of one’s likeness, image, name, voice or signature for commercial gain or profit.
20
The facts of Scarlett Johansson’s case are similar to earlier voice misappropriation cases – Bette Milder v Ford
(Motor Ad) and Tom Waits v Frito-Lay (Dorito radio commercial/ad).
15

41

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

and the Dartmouth Conference held in 1956. Also worthy of note are the Knowledge based system
(KBS) and Edinburgh Prolog Programming Language developed in the 1970s and 1980s which
helped to advance Machine Learning and AI.
UK is a party to the OECD AI Principles. The UK also adopted the UNESCO Recommendation
on the Ethics of AI, as well as the G7 Hiroshima AI Process. All these are aimed at ethical, safe,
innovative and trustworthy AI which drives and shapes UK’s approach to AI.
The UK has taken a liberal stance on AI regulation and governance. It has no specific AI
legislation. There are however relevant UK laws, and policies with implications for AI in respect
of data privacy, intellectual property, employment, consumer protection, online safety and product
liability. These include: UK GDPR; Data Protection Act; Consumer Protection Act; Online Safety
Act; Equality Act; Advanced Research and Invention Agency Act; Guide to using AI in the public
sector; ICO’s Guidance on the AI Auditing Framework; AI Standards Hub; and Frontier AI
Taskforce.21
In September 2021, UK as part of its National AI Strategy announced its 10-year plan “to make
Britain a global AI superpower.” The plan is premised on three key assumptions and three key
actions. The assumptions are: The key drivers of progress in AI are access to people, data,
computing power and finance; AI will become mainstream in much of the UK economy; and AI
governance and regulation must keep pace with AI development. 22
The key actions include - Investing in the long-term needs of the AI ecosystem; Ensuring AI
benefits all sectors and regions; and Governing AI effectively. 23
In 2023, UK established the AI Safety Institute to lead innovation and safe AI research. The
institute has been describes as UK’s “contribution to addressing a shared challenge posed to all of
humanity” by AI. UK intends to be proactive in defining the trajectory of AI development.
Minimise surprises and ensure public safety and interests by developing the sociotechnical
infrastructure needed to understand the risks of advanced AI and enable its governance. 24
In November 2023, the UK government hosted the UK AI Safety Summit at Bletchley Park,25
Buckinghamshire. The summit comprised of government leaders, industry executives, civil society
representatives, academics and researchers. The objective was to discuss and forge alliances toward
responsible and safe AI. The outcome of the summit was the Bletchley Declaration issued by 28
IAPP Global AI Law and Policy Tracker < https://iapp.org/resources/article/global-ai-legislation-tracker/>
accessed 19 May 2024.
22
UK Gov, “National AI Strategy” (GOV.UK, updated 18 December 2022)
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-ai-strategy/national-ai-strategy-html-version> 17 May 2024
23
ibid.
24
UK Gov, “Introducing the AI Safety Institute” [Ministerial Foreword] (GOV.UK, November 2023)
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-safety-institute-overview/introducing-the-ai-safety-institute>
accessed 17 May 2024.
25
The historic location of computer science development and the WWII codebreakers – Alan Turing, Max Neuman,
Jack Good and Donald Michie.

21

42

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

countries and over 150 representatives world-wide, including US, UK, Canada, China, EU, Australia,
India, Brazil, UAE, Japan, Nigeria, Rwanda and Singapore.26
The Tortoise Media 2023 Global AI Index ranked UK fourth place, behind the US, China and
Singapore. While on Oxford Insights’ 2023 AI Readiness Index UK ranked third place, among
193 nations ranked, using three main pillars: Government; Technology; and Data &
Infrastructure.27
In May 2023, a claim was filed by Getty in a UK High Court against Stability AI for scraping the
internet and using Getty images to train its generative AI model, Stable Diffusion without
permission thereby infringing its copyright as protected under sections 22, 23 and 27 of the
Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988 (CDPA) in the UK. Stability AI in its defense claimed
that no “article” also known “as infringing copy” was brought into the UK to train its AI model as
required by the CDPA. The company further argued that the term “article” in sections 22, 23 and
27 are limited to “physical and tangible items” and that intangible items (e.g., software) like Stable
Diffusion are not covered and therefore exempt.
Stability AI also pleaded the defense of “fair use” as Getty’s images were used temporarily and
solely for training purposes. The case also raises the questions whether AI generated content can
be considered original works or derivative works? Getty also claims that the images generated by
Stable Diffusion bear its trademarks, thus constituting trademark infringement.
In December 2023, the Court ruled that the case should go to full trial.
The outcome of this case would have far reaching consequences for UK copyright law and how
AI Actors choose to train their AI models without running afoul of the UK law. It would be
interesting to see how the court rules on this novel issue and how businesses and policymakers
react in due course.
CANADA
As noted earlier, in 2023 Canada was ranked among the top five countries in AI strategy by the
Global AI Index instituted by the Tortoise Media.28 In Canada, the proposed Artificial Intelligence
and Data Act (AIDA), which is part of Bill C-27, is intended to foster responsible AI practices,

UK Gov, “Bletchley Declaration” (GOV.UK, 1 November 2023) <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/aisafety-summit-2023-the-bletchley-declaration/the-bletchley-declaration-by-countries-attending-the-ai-safetysummit-1-2-november-2023> accessed 19 May 2024.
27
Oxford Insight, AI Readiness Index < https://oxfordinsights.com/ai-readiness/ai-readiness-index/> accessed 22
April 2024.
28
Canada is number 5 on the Global AI index <https://www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/global-ai/#rankings >
accessed 27 May 2024.

26

43

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

protect Canadians from high-risk AI systems, and Canadian organizations for participation in AI
development and deployment on the world stage.29
Canada’s AI strategy includes a Voluntary AI code of conduct on GenAI 30 as well as directives on
use of automated decision-making by the federal government and proposed amendment of the
Ontario’s Workers Act requiring full disclosure by businesses on the use of AI Hiring Tools in
their employment process.31
Canada, like US and UK, is a party to the OECD AI principles. Canada also participated in the
2023 UK AI Summit, which culminated in the Bletchley Declaration. Canada also hosted the
Global AI Summit 2023 in Toronto. As part of the G7, Canada endorsed the 11 Hiroshima Process
International Guiding Principles for Advanced AI systems. Canada also adopted UNESCO
Recommendation on the Ethics of AI.32
Canada’s AI governance approach is based largely on the G7 Hiroshima Process International
Guiding Principles for Organizations Developing Advanced AI Systems and the Hiroshima Process
International Code of Conduct for Organizations Developing Advanced AI Systems as well as the
U.S. Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial
Intelligence.33 This AI posture operates alongside extant laws on data privacy and protection,
consumer protection, banking and human rights.34
CHINA
China was among the first nations to implement a framework for AI strategy and regulation
alongside extant cybersecurity, data privacy and protection laws. 35 China was among 193 countries
that adopted the UNESCO recommendations on the Ethics of AI. China also participated in the
2023 UK AI summit which birthed the Bletchley Declaration. 36

IAPP Global AI Law and Policy Tracker < https://iapp.org/resources/article/global-ai-legislation-tracker/>
accessed 9 May 2024.
30
The Voluntary Code of Conduct on the Responsible Development and Management of Advanced for Generative
AI Systems, announced by Minister Champagne on September 27, 2023, will enable Canadian companies to
demonstrate that they are developing and using generative AI systems responsibly and strengthen Canadians’
confidence in the technology.
31
IAPP Global AI Law and Policy tracker, ibid.
32
ibid.
33
Government of Canada, “Canada helps shape global dialogue on the responsible and safe use of artificial
intelligence” (Canada.ca, 3 November 2023) <https://www.canada.ca/en/innovation-science-economicdevelopment/news/2023/11/canada-helps-shape-global-dialogue-on-the-responsible-and-safe-use-of-artificialintelligence.html> accessed 4 June 2024.
34
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act; Privacy Act; Consumer Product Safety Act; Food
and Drugs Act; Motor Vehicle Safety Act; Bank Act; Human Rights Act; Criminal Code; and Quebec's Law 25.
35
Cybersecurity Law; Data Security Law; Personal Information Protection Law; and Shenzhen Special Economic
Zone AI Industry Promotion Regulation.
36
IAPP Global AI Law and Policy Tracker < https://iapp.org/resources/article/global-ai-legislation-tracker/>
accessed 9 May 2024.

29

44

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

The Tortoise Media 2023 Global AI Index ranked China second place, behind the US and ahead
of Singapore, UK and Canada. Curiously, on the Oxford Insights’ 2023 AI Readiness Index China
ranked sixteenth place, among 193 nations ranked.37
In 2017 the Chinese State Council released the New Generation Artificial Intelligence
Development Plan (AIDP).
In June 2019, the National New Generation Artificial Intelligence Governance Expert Committee
established in March 2019 by China’s Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) released a
document outlining eight principles for AI governance and “responsible AI.” 38
The eight principles are: Harmony and friendliness; Fairness and justice; Inclusivity and sharing;
Respect privacy; Secure/safe and controllable; Shared responsibility; Open collaboration; and
Agile governance.
1. Harmony and friendliness. AI systems should conform to and promote human values,
ethics, and safety to humans and society.
2. Fairness and justice. AI development should promote fairness and justice, protect the
rights and interests of stakeholders, and promote equality of opportunity.
3. Inclusivity and sharing. AI should: promote green development and meet the requirements
of environmental friendliness and resource conservation; promote inclusive development,
strengthen AI education and encourage open and orderly competition.
4. Respect privacy. AI development should respect and protect personal privacy and fully
protect the individual's right to know and right to choose.
5. Secure/safe and controllable. AI systems should continuously improve transparency,
explainability, reliability, and controllability, and gradually achieve auditability,
supervisability, traceability, and trustworthiness.
6. Shared responsibility. AI developers, users, and other interested parties should possess a
strong sense of social responsibility and self-discipline, and strictly abide by laws,
regulations, ethics, morals, standards, and norms.
7. Open collaboration. Encourage exchanges and cooperation across disciplines, domains,
regions, and borders; among international organizations, governments, businesses,
academia and civil society for the development and governance of AI.
8. Agile governance. Ensure innovative and trustworthy AI by continuously promoting
governance principles throughout the AI life cycle for the benefit of humans and society.39
In October 2021, the AI Governance Committee also released the Ethical Norms for New
Generation Artificial Intelligence (Ethical Norms), whose purpose is to incorporate ethics into the

Tortoise Media and Oxford Insights, ibid.
See also Algorithm Watch “AI Ethics Guidelines Global Inventory”
<https://inventory.algorithmwatch.org/?sfid=172&_sfm_i_location=China> accessed 6 May 2024.
39
ibid.

37

38

45

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

entire artificial intelligence (AI) life cycle and to provide ethical guidance to natural persons, legal
persons, and other related institutions engaged in AI-related activities. 40
The Ethical Norms proposes six basic ethical requirements, namely: the advancement of human
welfare, the promotion of fairness and justice, the protection of privacy and security, the assurance
of controllability and trustworthiness, the strengthening of accountability, and improvements to
the cultivation of ethics. It also puts forward 18 specific ethical requirements concerning AI
management, research and development (R&D), supply, use, and other specific activities. 41
On 10 July 2023, the MOST jointly with the Cybersecurity Administration, National Development
and Reform Commission, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology, Ministry of Public Security, and State Administration of
Radio and Television, promulgated China’s new “Interim Measures for the Management of
Generative Artificial Intelligence Services” to take effect on 15 August 2023.42
The rules address several global concerns, including: - content control/censorship; bias and
discrimination; protection of IP rights; misinformation; and data privacy and protection.
1. Content control/censorship – content generated shall embody the core socialist values and
prohibits contents that is extremist, separatist, divisive, obscene, fake or harmful. 43
2. Bias and Discrimination – effective measures shall be employed during the design and
training of AI models to prevent discrimination based on race, ethnicity, faith, nationality,
region, sex, age, profession, or health.44
3. Protection of IP rights - intellectual property rights must be respected and not infringed
in the development of AI models.45
4. Misinformation - providers must employ effective measures to increase the quality of
training data, and increase the truth, accuracy, objectivity, and diversity of training data.46
In addition providers shall label AI generated content, like images and videos.47
5. Data Privacy and Protection – providers must use data and foundational models that have
lawful sources to train GenAI models, obtain consent where personal data is involved,
comply with relevant data privacy and protection laws, protect individual’s publicity rights
and prevent privacy torts, adhere to data minimization and purpose limitation principles,
and promptly address individual request to access, rectify or delete personal data.48
Center for Security and Emerging Technologies (CSET) <https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/ethical-normsfor-new-generation-artificial-intelligence-released/> accessed 23 May 2024.
41
ibid, for full text and translation.
42
China Law Translate, “Interim Measures for the Management of Generative Artificial Intelligence Services”
<https://www.chinalawtranslate.com/en/generative-ai-interim/ > accessed 29 May 2024
43
art 4(1).
44
art 4(2).
45
arts 4(3) and 7(2).
46
art 7(4).
47
art 12.
48
arts 4(4), 7(1)(3)(5) and 11.

40

46

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

The use of AI in China and by Chinese companies has witnessed an uptick in lawsuits on copyright,
data protection and scraping.
In November 2023, the Beijing Internet Court recognized and protected the copyright of Authors
of AI generated works. Determining the eligibility of AI generated content for copyright protection
is a complex and evolving legal and ethical question. It involves such factors as the level of human
involvement, originality and creativity in the entire creation process. The court noted that the image
had been created using a series of prompts and parameters that ultimately reflected the author’s
creativity and personality. The court held that the author of an AI generated work is the person who
directly makes the relevant settings to the AI model, instead of the AI model itself. 49 This position
seems to be consistent with the U.S. Copyright Office’s position that a work can have copyright
protection where its creation is AI assisted; but where wholly created by AI the work will not be
protected.50
In other lawsuits in China and overseas concerning data scraping and copyright infringement the
courts have emphasized the importance of data privacy and protection and AI actors should ensure
the lawful basis for data used in training their AI models. 51
In February 2024, a Chinese court fined a GenAI developer/company for copyright violations. The
company was sued because its GenAI images were too similar to their copyrighted images. The
Court awarded $1,389 damages in favor of the plaintiff. Curiously the company was only required
to have a mechanism to the generating of the infringing images, but no restrictions was imposed
on using copyrighted material to train its AI model. 52
SINGAPORE
Singapore is a party to the OECD AI principles. Singapore participated in the 2023 UK AI Summit,
from which emerged the Bletchley Declaration. Singapore also adopted the UNESCO
Recommendation on the Ethics of AI. Singapore aims to be a global hub for AI design and
development through its National AI Strategy. 53
Singapore via the Personal Data Protection Commission (PDPC) has developed voluntary
governance frameworks and initiatives for ethical AI, which include:

IAM, “Beijing Internet Court rules that AI-generated content is eligible for copyright protection” (IAM, 3 January
2024) <https://www.iam-media.com/article/beijing-internet-court-rules-ai-generated-content-eligible-copyrightprotection> accessed 3 June 2024.
50
Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence, 88 Fed. Reg.
16,190 (Mar. 16, 2023) (to be codified at 37 C.F.R. § 202).
51
Retail Boss, “Shein: Nearly 100 lawsuit cases filed against it to date, report” (RetailBoss, 28 May 2024)
<https://retailboss.co/nearly-100-lawsuit-cases-filed-against-it-to-date-report/> accessed 7 June 2024.
52
Johanna Costigan “China Rules AI firm Committed Copyright Infringement” (Forbes, 29 February 2024)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/johannacostigan/2024/02/29/china-rules-ai-firm-committed-copyrightinfringement/?sh=1c950dc1454d> accessed 17 April 2024.
53
IAPP Global AI Law and Policy tracker, ibid.
49

47

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

▪

▪

▪

Model AI Governance frameworks – released in 2019, at the World Economic Forum
Annual Meeting in Davos, Switzerland, with a second edition in January 2020, leveraging
on Singapore’s participation in leading international platforms, such as the European
Commission’s High-Level Expert Group and the OECD Expert Group on AI. 54
The Model framework provides guidance to the AI actors in the private sector on ethical
and governance issues related to the deployment of AI. The framework focuses primarily
on four broad areas: internal governance structures and measures, human involvement in
AI-augmented decision-making, operations management and stakeholder interaction and
communication.55
The framework has been described as a firm foundation for the responsible use of AI and
its future evolution. It seeks to advance a human-centric approach to AI, facilitate
innovation, safeguard public trust and ensure positive impact on the world in the present
and for posterity.56
AI Verify Foundation – a non-profit foundation that aims to harness the collective power
of global open-source community to develop international guidelines, standards and AI
testing tools to enable responsible AI. The Foundation partners and collaborates with
Google, Microsoft, IBM, the Info-communications Media Development Authority
(IMDA), Aicadium (Temasek’s AI Centre of Excellence), Red Hat, and Salesforce.57
Proposed Advisory Guidelines on Use of Personal Data in AI Recommendation and
Decision Systems – The guidelines seek to achieve consumer confidence and trust while
promoting AI technology and innovation.

Singapore is ranked second and third respectively behind the US and China on the 2023 ranking
of Oxford Insights’ AI Readiness Index and Tortoise Media Global AI Index.58
Singapore also has extant laws and policies relevant to AI, namely: Personal Data Protection Act,
Computer Misuse Act, Copyright Act, Cybersecurity Act, and The Digital Economy Partnership
Agreement.
NIGERIA
It has been noted that Africa is on the cusp of digitalization which is expected to be driven by the
application of AI.59 With a population of over 220 million and abundant natural resources Nigeria
is the largest democracy and a country of significant importance on the African continent.60 Nigeria

Model AI Governance Framework (2nd edn, 2020), 7.
ibid 10.
56
ibid 8.
57
AI Verify Foundation < https://aiverifyfoundation.sg/ai-verify-foundation/> accessed 2 June 2024.
58
ibid.
59
Damian Eke, ibid 1.
60
Nigeria is the 6th most populated countries in the world with a median age of 17.2. Being one of 7 countries that
account for about half of the world population. Worldometer <https://www.worldometers.info/worldpopulation/nigeria-population/> accessed 23 April 2024.

54

55

48

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

has a fast-growing technology start-up ecosystem.61 In 2021 Nigeria accounted for 25% of the $1.3
billion funding to African tech start-ups. In November 2021 Nigeria adopted the UNESCO
Recommendation on the Ethics of AI alongside 193 member countries. Nigeria also participated
in the 2023 U.K. AI Summit, which concluded with the Bletchley Declaration.
In August 2023, the Honourable Minister for Communication, Innovation and Digital economy
called for AI experts of Nigerian decent globally to help co-create a National AI Strategy for
Nigeria. The objective is to formulate an AI Strategy that would ensure innovative and trustworthy
AI that is ethical, safe and beneficial to the Nigerian State and its citizens. By driving sustainable
economic growth and positive impact in such areas as agriculture, education, healthcare, finance
and public service.
From April 15 to 18, 2024 Nigeria held the National Artificial Intelligence Strategy Workshop
comprising 120 leading Nigerian AI experts and researchers from the public and private sector,
including academia. The workshop was supported by UNESCO and other partners, like, Google,
Meta and Microsoft. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), National Centre for
Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (NCAIR), Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC),
National Information Technology Development Agency (NITDA), Universal Service Provision
Fund (USPF), and Galaxy Backbone.
At the close of the AI strategy workshop a number of strategic partnerships and projects to fasttrack Nigeria’s growth in the AI field were outlined:
•

•

•

61

NCAIR Relaunch: The relaunch of new and improved capacity at the National Centre
for Al and Robotics (NCAIR) to better fulfil its mandate. The Centre is a special purpose
vehicle created to promote research and development on emerging technologies and
their practical application in the areas of Nigerian national interest. As a digital
innovation and research facility, NCAIR focuses on Artificial Intelligence (Al),
Robotics and Drones, Internet of Things (loT), and other emerging technologies, aimed
at transforming the Nigerian digital economy. The capacity building imperative is
undertaken with support from global technology company, Cisco.
Nigerian Multilingual Large Language Model: The multilingual LLM aims to build
the most robust Nigerian large language model. To achieve this, the project will
leverage the support of the 3 Million Technical Talent (3MTT) programme Fellows to
collate high quality Nigerian language data and fuel the development some of the most
sophisticated AI models. The project is developed by Awarri in partnership with NITDA
and Data.org.
Nigeria’s Computing Infrastructure Pilot: To accelerate the development of Al
projects of national interest, Galaxy Backbone Limited will partner 21st Century
Technologies to develop Nigeria’s national compute project. The Compute will be
available to local researchers, startups, government entities working on critical Al

Lagos in considered a notable tech and entertainment hub.

49

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

•

projects that are of national interest. It will reside at the Galaxy Backbone Data Centre
and accessible through NCAIR.
The AI Collective: The Nigeria Al Collective is a community of practice collaborating
towards accelerating the nation’s collective prosperity through an inclusive Al
Ecosystem. The Collective will harness the power of Al to drive economic prosperity,
accelerate innovation and social development, and position Nigeria as a leading force
in AI for good globally.62

In order to leverage technology, build capacity and the technical backbone to drive the digital
economy Nigeria launched several initiatives. These include the 3 Million Technical Talent
(3MTT) program and the Nigeria AI Research Scheme, Digital Nigeria, and e-Government
Initiative. The 3MTT program brings togethers fellows, training providers, partners and placement
organizations in collaboration with NITDA to facilitate fellowship programs in 12 areas (software
development, UI/UX design, data analysis & visualization, quality assurance, product
management, data science, animation, AI/Machine Learning, cybersecurity, game development,
cloud computing, and dev op).63
The Nigeria AI Research Scheme aims to foster a vibrant and sustainable AI ecosystem in Nigeria
by providing financial support, facilitating knowledge sharing and collaboration among
individuals and organisations in the AI industry. AI researchers or start-ups are provided funding
to support their work in 7 key areas (agriculture, education and workforce, finance, governance,
utility, healthcare and sustainability).64
The Digital Nigeria program was launched to empower innovators and entrepreneurs with the
requisite skills to thrive in an emerging digital economy. In October 2023, the program held a
conference on Emerging Technologies (Blockchain, AI). The next Digital Nigeria International
Conference shall be held from October 22 to 24, 2024 with over 10,000 in-person attendees and
5,000 virtually from all over the world. The Digital Nigeria conference offers an excellent platform
for you to showcase your brand to industry peers, international technology experts, the press, and
the wider blockchain, Web3, IoT, Startup Ecosystem and Investors, and AI, XR & Metaverse
community.65
The e-Government Initiative seeks to leverage technology to boost public service productivity by
improving service delivery, drive transparency, accountability and good governance. This would
include establishing and activating the National E-Government Master Plan, Government Service
Portal (GSP), Government Contact Centre (GCC), Open Data Portal, Electronic Document
FMCIDE, “Dr. Tijani Wraps Up Artificial Intelligence Strategy Workshop; Announces Groundbreaking
Partnerships with Cisco, 21st Century Technologies, others” (FMCIDE, 19 April 2024) < https://fmcide.gov.ng/honminister-dr-bosun-tijani-wraps-up-artificial-intelligence-strategy-workshop-announces-groundbreakingpartnerships-with-cisco-21st-century-technologies-others/> accessed 23 April 2024.
63
FMCIDE, “Our Initiatives” <https://fmcide.gov.ng/initiatives/> accessed 23 April 2024.
64
ibid.
65
ibid. See also Digital Nigeria Conference 2024 < https://digitalnigeria.gov.ng/> accessed 23 April 2024
62

50

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

Management System (EDMS), the E-Government Capacity Building Program, and the National
E-Health Strategic Framework.66
In June 2023, Nigeria passed the Nigeria Data Protection Act (NDPA) which is based on the EU
GDPR. The NDPA has robust provisions on data privacy and security, sensitive data, children and
vulnerable persons and automated decision making.67 These are critical due to the intersection
between AI and privacy and would definitely have implications for AI development and
deployment within the Nigerian jurisdiction and digital economy.68
On the Tortoise Media 2023 Global AI Index, Nigeria was ranked sixty-first out of 62 nations,
while on the Oxford Insights’ AI Readiness index Nigeria was ranked 103 out of 193 counties
ranked. Nigeria is also ranked 49th and 54th place for “talent” and “government strategy” on the
Tortoise Index. It is expected that these rankings would improve over time with commitment and
collaborative efforts by the public and private sector to achieve the objectives of the National AI
Strategy to engender innovative and trustworthy AI.

ibid.
NDPA, ss 24 - 27, 30, 31, 37, and 39.
68
cf. EU AI Act.

66
67

51

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

6.0 Next Steps
Advancements in the development and deployment of AI and AI systems will continue to evolve
and grow. It shall find intersections with humans and society igniting disruptive and
transformational impacts. At the center of it all AI governance would seek to strike a balance
between potential AI risks and benefits. More nations would pass laws and policies for AI
governance. The AI regulatory landscape would further develop and crystallize with the
implementation of laws and feedback from different quarters and levels. There would be more
guidance and playbooks developed and issued from the collaborative efforts of governments,
policymakers, academics, civil society, AI actors and other stakeholders.
AI governance and responsible AI is crucial because of the potential benefits and risks associated
with AI. This realization imposes different responsibilities on all AI stakeholders, especially
Governments, AI Actors and consumers, to collectively foster ethical, innovative, responsible, safe
and trustworthy AI.
Governments have a responsibility to adopt AI strategies and enact laws that promote innovative
and trustworthy AI. AI Actors have a duty not to cause harm through their AI systems and to
comply with relevant laws and policies. Consumers and end users of AI should also do their part
by educating themselves about their rights as they relate to AI. AI literacy is paramount. The EU
GDPR, EU AI Act and the US State laws contain provisions about full disclosure, consent, bias
and discrimination and automated decision making, stipulating the rights and obligations of AI
actors and consumers.
Organizations involved in the development and deployment of AI are the most affected by the EU
AI Act.1 Both the NIST and ISO frameworks are aimed at helping organizations achieve ethical,
safe and trustworthy AI. Organizations would need to be proactive and committed in their approach
to AI and AI governance in order to remain compliant with government laws and policies, conform
to industry standards and sustain customer confidence and public trust. An organization’s AI
governance framework must reflect its unique risk tolerance, corporate goals, culture and core
values, industry and geographical footprint.
Getting Your Organizations AI ready
The AI revolution may be described as a Promethean moment akin to the discovery of fire, the
invention of the wheel, or the internet. Change is coming. Organizations and their board of
directors should be prepared and must have a strategy for AI and AI governance. The
aforementioned strategies and frameworks can be of assistance in establishing a robust AI
governance framework. Taken together they can be broken down into four major steps, namely:
For example, big tech companies in the e-commerce and social media spaces that use big data and AI in their
business operations.
1

52

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

Understanding AI; AI Strategy; AI Risk assessment and AI Risk Management; and Human capital
Management and Capacity Development.
1. Understanding AI – This involves the planning and discovery stage. Organizations must
include AI knowledge and education as a board agenda. There must be management buy-in on AI.
The senior management must understand how AI impacts their business operations, their industry
and domain. Clearly identify your organization’s objectives on the use and relevance of AI to its
business. Who are you as an AI Actor? Are you a provider or deployer? This would help determine
your rights and compliance obligations under relevant laws, like the EU AI Act.
2. AI Strategy – The organization must set up an AI Steering/Oversight Committee on AI
Governance. The Committee must have the right skillsets. It should be cross-functional and
multidisciplinary comprising professionals impacted by AI use such as HR, Legal, Compliance,
IT, Sales and Marketing including C-Suite executives (e.g., CPO, CTO, CFO, COO, CISO) to
integrate a top-bottom involvement and commitment. Their terms of reference would be coming
up with AI policies and procedures that align with the overall objectives and goals of the
organization, are compliant with legal and regulatory requirements and are capable of fostering
innovative, responsible, safe and trustworthy AI.
As part of its AI strategy the organization should adopt an appropriate AI Risk Management
Framework (e.g., NIST or ISO) and take cognizance of the relevant international and domestic
laws and regulations (like EU AI Act, AIDA, NDPA and US State laws) depending on its
jurisdiction and activities. The framework should be activated and integrated throughout the AI
lifecycle, that is, design, planning, development and deployment.
3. AI Risk Assessment and AI Risk Management – The organization must determine its AI risk
profile, in particular its risk priority and risk tolerance. The Organization must conduct an AI model
inventory and map all the AI and AI systems being designed, developed, deployed or used across
the organization depending on the organization’s AI actor status. Are you developing closedsource/proprietary AI or deploying open-source/third-party solution? Are there AI risks associated
with third party vendors or contractors?
Next the identified AI must be classified according to sensitivity and risk level
(Unacceptable/Prohibited risk, High-risk, Limited risk, Minimal risk and General Purpose AI).
You then have to assess the risks associated with your AI system(s). In the case of high-risk
intended to be placed on the EU single market, a conformity assessment would be required. Other
assessments, like fundamental rights impact assessment, restrictions and obligations may also be
required depending on the AI risk classifications. Where personal data is involved a data inventory,
data mapping, and risk assessment would be necessary. Implement PbD, PET, DPIA or PIA and

53

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

ROPA obligations in compliance with relevant laws and regulations2 where applicable. It is also
important to establish data provenance and data lineage.
Armed with the results of the AI systems, and data inventory and the risk assessments conducted
the Organization must develop critical policies such as an AI Internal Use Policy, AI Governance
Policy, and AI RMF. Other policies may include data privacy and security policies together with
incident response and data breach policies. These policies must align with and would form part of
the organization’s overall AI governance program.
The organization must establish and activate its AI governance program. The organization must
communicate and implement its policies. Employees must be apprised of the organization’s AI
policies. Relevant policies,3 disclosures4 and rights5 should also be communicated to consumers
in accordance to relevant international and domestic laws and regulations. 6
Risk owners and critical officers should be identified with roles and responsibilities assigned. Two
key roles would be an AI Ethics Officer and an AI Governance Officer.7 The former would be
responsible for ensuring responsible and trustworthy AI throughout the AI lifecycle. The AI
Ethicist would look at issues like systems fairness and AI bias and discrimination risks. The latter,
the AI governance officer would be more akin to carrying out a Governance, Risk and Compliance
(GRC) role, especially operationalizing frameworks, policies and practices to ensure trustworthy
AI and overseeing legal and regulatory compliance requirements.
The AI governance program should identify, evaluate and treat the risks by implementing technical
and organizational controls, safeguards and countermeasures to mitigate risks and vulnerabilities.
Ensure data governance with sufficient testing and validation of training datasets for data accuracy
and quality.8 Implement human oversight to ensure accuracy and eliminate harm. There should be
measures to manage risk of AI and algorithm bias, as well as AI “hallucination” phenomenon.9

E-Government Act, EU GDPR and AI Act. Privacy by Design (PbD) and Privacy Enhancing Technology (PET) are
intended to address privacy risks. DPIAs and PIAs are used to assess privacy risk; and a Report of Processing
Activities (ROPA) facilitates transparency and accountability. See GDPR, arts 25, 30, and 35.
3
For example: AI use policy, privacy policy, copyright policy, privacy notice, use terms and conditions, warranties
and representation, and product liability.
4
Disclosure about whether AI (like automated decision making) is being interacted with or used in a process or
decision involving the benefits, rights and freedoms of an individual; or if out-put is AI generated; or how data is
collected, used, shared or sold; how to make a complaint or seek remediation on an issue involving organization’s AI
and AI systems. EU AI Act, arts 50 and 86.
5
where data is involved, these include the rights to consent, opt-out/opt-in, access, restrict use or sale, rectify or
erasure.
6
Like the EU AI Act, GDPR, NYC LL 144 regarding Automated Employee Tools and Colorado AI Act.
7
Other emergent roles in the AI era could be AI consultant, AI researcher, AI designer, AI trainer, Machine learning
engineer, AI data steward, AI operations (AIOps) engineer, AI compliance officer, and AI auditor. Roles may overlap
depending on the designation the organization chooses.
8
The EU AI Act, art 57 provides for AI regulatory sandbox to test AI systems before placement on the market.
9
RAG and Grounding may be applicable here. EU AI Act, art 15.
2

54

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

There should be continuous monitoring of AI performance and periodic audits of data privacy,
cybersecurity and AI risks to guarantee regulatory compliance and evaluate the effectiveness of
the program.
All activities must be documented and recorded throughout the AI lifecycle, including technical
documentation in the case of high-risk AI, for review internally or externally by auditors or
supervisory authorities. Under the EU AI Act providers must report any incidents or malfunctions
of high-risk AI systems to the relevant authorities. This will help maintain accountability and
transparency.10
4. Human Capital Management and Capacity Development – There should be allocation of
roles and responsibilities across the organization and AI lifecycle. There should be monitoring and
accountability by holding managers and desk officers accountable for tasks and activities.
Humans are the most valuable asset of an organization however they are also its weakest. They are
prone to cyberattacks, social engineering, bias, negligence, incompetence and other human failings
and vices. These vulnerabilities can be mitigated through training and awareness which should be
general as well as role specific.
There should be a robust and structured AI literacy program with general training and awareness
about the benefits and risks of AI; the organization’s AI policies and procedure; AI principles and
AI risk management; the risk of AI solutionism and over-dependency on AI tools;11 ethical and
responsible AI; data management and data governance; data privacy and security as well as privacy
enhancement.12
The training should include all employees and where necessary third-party vendors and
contractors. There should be contracts between the organization and its vendors and contractors
securing their commitment to adhere to the organization’s AI governance policies and compliance
requirements during the pendency of contracts. Non-Disclosure Agreements (NDAs) may also be
used where applicable.
There should also be technical and targeted training to upskill and reskill, to enhance competency
and capacity of critical AI officers across the AI lifecycle to achieve compliance. The organization
must be proactive and stay up to date with AI trends and regulatory requirements to succeed.

EU AI Act, arts 12, 18, 19 and 73 cf. Report on Processing Activity (ROPA), data breach notification, and Data
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) requirements under GDPR, arts 30, 33 and 35.
11
In May 2023 it was reported that Samsung had banned ChatGPT outright because an employee uploaded sensitive
source code to ChatGPT which was leaked externally, another employee uploaded a confidential recording to
ChatGPT to create a summary. Other companies to restrict the use of ChatGPT by employees are Amazon and JP
Morgan in January and February 2023, respectively. Siladitya Ray “Samsung Bans ChatGPT Among Employees
After Sensitive Code Leak” (Forbes, 2 May 2023) <Samsung Bans ChatGPT Among Employees After Sensitive
Code Leak (forbes.com)> accessed 4 June 2024.
12
EU AI Act, art 4.
10

55

© AI Governance: An Overview (Dec. 2023 – May 2024) Revised June 2024 | Alex wodi

AI actors should embrace communication and collaboration as well as knowledge and experience
sharing within the AI community. The wealth of resources available on different platforms and
initiatives should be leveraged for success.
The OECD, NIST and ISO/IEC have useful guides for implementing AI principles, standards,
governance, and risk management. The OECD AI observatory also has a catalog of AI tools,
templates, metrics, methodologies and resources available to organizations to facilitate and boost
their AI governance program.
Effective AI governance incorporates privacy and data governance practices into AI lifecycle.
From the design and planning stage to the development and deployment stages. In view of the
significance of data to AI, and the overlaps between privacy practices and AI governance,
businesses would do well to leverage the expertise and competency of their privacy professionals
and adapt existing privacy, cybersecurity, and GRC architecture to foster a robust AI risks
management and AI governance program.
By being pragmatic and adopting a proactive approach to AI strategy and AI governance
governments, organizations and consumers would stay ahead of the curve and be prepared for the
AI revolution. AI has potential risks, but it also has potential benefits for humans and the planet in
such area as health, education, finance, agriculture, cybersecurity, public service, including finding
solutions for SDGs. We should all embrace AI with an open mind and seek ways to employ its
power to positively impact our daily lives and society.

56

