Journal of Contemporary
European Research
Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015)

Research Article

Broadening Aims and Building Support in
Science, Technology and Innovation Policy: The
Case of the European Research Area
Inga Ulnicane University of Vienna

Citation
Ulnicane, I. (2015). Broadening Aims and Building Support in Science, Technology and Innovation
Policy: The Case of the European Research Area , Journal of Contemporary European Research. 11
(1), pp. 31-49.
First published at: www.jcer.net

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

Abstract
The aim of this article is to analyse the evolution of the ideational framework of the most ambitious
initiative in supranational research governance so far – the European Research Area (ERA), launched
by the European Commission in 2000. In order to do so, the ERA initiative is analysed against the
background of the long-term development of the science, technology and innovation policy ideas. The
analysis reveals that over the course of 14 years, the policy aims of, and support for, the ERA initiative
have considerably broadened. While economic competitiveness goals initially dominated the
Co
issio s i itiati e to lau h the E‘A, the initiative has gradually expanded towards social and
scientific aims as well as stronger involvement of member states and stakeholders. Recent big ideas
of excellent science and Grand Challenges help increase support for the ERA initiative among the
research community and society. In the broadened ERA ideational frame, diverse aims of scientific
freedom, societal relevance and economic competitiveness co-exist but attention to the relationships
between them has been limited. Further exploration and conceptualization of the relationships
between diverse policy ideas is an important challenge for future research policy studies and practice.

Keywords
European Research Area; Science; technology and innovation policy; Economic competitiveness;
Grand Challenges; Scientific excellence

There is te sio etwee those who stress the i porta e of a auto o ous Repu li of “ ie e
and those who emphasise that considerations of social and economic value and cost, judged in
considerable part by non-scientists, should play a major role in determining basic research allocation
decisions. The controversies here shade over into a semantically adjacent area – the relative
emphasis that should be placed on basic versus applied research. (Nelson 1977: 65)
Toward what is the Eu opea U io s EU) research policy aiming? Is the EU supporting research so it
can become the most competitive economy in the world? Does it want to promote research of the
highest scientific quality? Or does it see research as a tool to solve major societal problems in areas
such as health, environment and energy? How compatible are these different aims and what roles do
the long-standing tensions and controversies, as indicated in the opening quote from Richard Nelson
(1977), play in the current EU research policy? What are the values, ideas and interests involved in the
diverse aims of EU research policy? These are timely questions considering the EU s increased
involvement in the field of research policy. While the majority of research funding is allocated at the
national level, the EU s involvement has gradually increased over the decades (Borrás 2003; Peterson
and Sharp 1998). This article will focus on the most ambitious EU project in this field so far - the
European Research Area (ERA) initiative, launched in 2000. The ERA initiative covers a broad set of
activities including reforms of national research systems, cooperation and coordination among
national research funding activities, improved career systems and mobility of researchers.
While a number of previous studies have addressed the emergence of the ERA initiative in the context
of the EU s research policy (Chou 2014; Delanghe et al. 2009; Edler et al. 2003; Prange-Gstöhl 2010),
the novelty of this analysis is to study the evolution of the ERA initiative and its main goals from the
launch of the initiative in 2000 until 2014, in light of the long-term development of science, technology

32

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

and innovation (STI) policy1 ideas. Analysing the ERA initiative against the background of the long-term
evolution of the STI policy frame enables us to also shed light on how old policy ideas appear in the
ERA initiative in new forms, helping to mobilize support for the initiative. Additionally, applying a
historically developed research policy frame for the interpretation of recent ERA developments draws
attention to further conceptual work needed. This article proceeds as follows: firstly, the concept of
framing is introduced and the historical evolution of the STI policy frame is discussed; secondly, the
evolution of the ERA initiative from 2000 until 2014 is analysed with a particular focus on its main aims
and actors involved; and finally, the concluding section conceptualizes the evolution of the ERA
ideational framework in the context of the long-standing STI policy ideas.

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION POLICY FRAMING
To study the main ideas, rationales, interests and values guiding STI policy, the concept of f a e is
used, in which facts, values, theories, and interests a e i teg ated ‘ei and Schön 1993: 145).
According to Donald Rein and Martin Schön (Rein and Schön 1993:
), framing is a way of selecting,
organizing, interpreting, and making sense of a complex reality to provide guideposts for knowing,
analysing, persuading, and acting. A frame is a perspective from which an amorphous, ill-defined,
problematic situation can be made sense of and acted o . According to Rein and Schön, frames are
developed in interactions among individuals, interest groups and institutions and can be used
strategically for problem-solving, agenda-setting and decision-making. Thus, the concept of the frame
is useful for exploring changes in the content of STI policy.
While diverse ideas on the role of science, technology and innovation in society have been debated
over centuries, STI policy as a distinct public policy area was established after World War II (Elzinga
and Jamison 1995). Scholars depict the evolution of this policy field as a cumulative three-step
expansion from s ie e poli
to te h olog poli
a d late to innovation policy , where every
subsequent step is broader and incorporates ideas and instruments from the previous ones (Borrás
2003; Lundvall and Borrás 2005). Expansion of this policy field has also been conceptualized as
evolution of policy paradigms and frames (Biegelbauer and Borrás 2003; Sanz-Menendez and Borrás
2001), generations (Boekholt 2010) and periodizations (Elzinga 2012), helping to make sense of
changing ideas. It is important to keep in mind that this is a cumulative process and not a succession
of strictly delineated and clear-cut historical stages.
The evolving STI policy frame has been spread internationally by an epistemic community of experts
and policy-makers that has largely operated via the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), which has played a leading role in the development of STI policy (Lundvall and
Borrás 2005; Elzinga and Jamison 1995). The international policy frames have influenced the
development of the STI policy of the EU and its member states (Borrás 2003; Sanz-Menendez and
Borrás 2001) and appropriate policy instruments (Boekholt 2010). Toda s de ates a out the
objectives, values and governance of the ERA can be better understood by taking a long-term view of
how the policy ideas in this area have emerged and evolved.

Science policy frame
The i itial s ie e poli
frame emerging in the 1940s was largely shaped by the experience of the
two world wars, where science played an important but also widely debated role. One of the bestknown early manifestos calling for the establishment of scie e poli is the 9
epo t Science The
E dless F o tie by Vannevar Bush. Building on the vital role science had played during the war, the
report calls for the establishment of a science policy in the United States that would support the use

33

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

of the scientific knowledge accumulated during the war fo i ilia pu poses su h as a agai st
disease and public welfare. Such a policy would also support research activities in public and private
organizations as well as discover and develop scientific talent. The report is well known for its call to
suppo t basic research (Pielke 2012), which, according to Bush, would later lead to new products
and processes. Therefore, the report advocated what became known as the linear model of
inno atio , according to which support for basic research leads to the development of new products
and processes which are afterwards introduced into production and market, thus fuelling economic
growth (Kline and Rosenberg 1986). An emphasis on support for basic research in the report was
accompanied by a call to preserve freedom of inquiry, stati g that [S]cientific progress on a broad
front results from the free play of free intellects, working on subjects of their own choice, in the
manner dictated by their curiosity fo e plo atio of the u k o
(Bush 1945: 12).
A u e of ideas i Bush s epo t e e losel elated to the ajo o t o e s a out the ole of
science between the views of John Bernal advocating the social function of science (1939) and Michael
Polanyi stressing the importance of academic freedom (1962). Writing between the two world wars,
Be al 9 9) e phasised that e e t e e ts ha e led to a iti al e a i atio of the function of
s ie e i so iet Be al 9 9: xiii). According to him, the social function of science implies that
science has to assist human needs and be the chief agent of change in society (Bernal 1939: 383).
Be al defi es s ie e as a integral part both of the material and economic life of our times and of
the ideas which guide and inspire it. Science puts into our hands the means of satisfying our material
needs. It gives us also the ideas which will enable us to understand, coordinate, and satisfy our needs
in the so ial sphe e 9 9: 408).
While Bernal responded to the attacks on scientists involvement in wars by advocating its social
function, his contemporaries emphasised internal norms of science. One of the best-known
contributions comes from Robert Merton, who stated in his 1942 essay on the normative structure of
science that the i stitutio al goal of s ie e is the e te sio of e tified k o ledge Me to 9 :
270) and that the ethos of modern science consists of four sets of institutional imperatives:
communism (i.e. common ownership of findings by scientific community), universalism,
disinterestedness and organized scepticism2.
The main critique of Be al s all fo the so ial fu tio of s ie e came from Pola i s 9 essay
‘epu li of “ ie e , which emphasised the freedom for scientists to choose their research problems
and to self-organize. According to Polanyi, the pu suit of s ie e
i depe de t self-coordinated
initiatives assures the most efficient possible o ga isatio of s ie tifi p og ess. A d […] a autho it
which would undertake to direct the work of the scientist centrally would bring the progress of science
virtually to a sta dstill Pola i 9 : 56). He assigns the main role to the scientific authority that
scientists exercise over each other, while central political authority can, in his view, only assist or
hamper spontaneous developments of science but cannot shape its advance.
While these debates on the social function and freedom of science emerged in a certain historical
context, they have shaped the development of research policy worldwide and have been major points
of reference in the on-going discussions about the governance of science (Borrás 2012; Pielke 2014).
Arguments of Polanyi and Bernal have been used for discussing a wide range of issues from
anticipation of emerging technologies (Guston 2012) to analysing the changing character of research
councils (Rip 1994), evaluation and funding (Ziman 1983). Another important term that emerged
during the post-war era was ig s ie e (Price 1963), which describes the increased role of the large
scale research infrastructure and collaborations which today require complex strategic partnerships
and are k o as egas ie e (Elzinga 2012).
To summarize, the initial science policy frame started to evolve when this policy field was established
after World War II. The big questions asked about the use of scientific knowledge for civilian purposes
(Bush 1945), the social function of science (Bernal 1939), scientific norms (Merton 1942) and scientific

34

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

freedom (Polanyi 1962) are still important in shaping scientific debates today (Borrás 2012; Pielke
2014). This initial frame also sets out some of the key policy instruments which are still relevant today
such as support for basic research, public and private research organizations, scientific talent and
infrastructure.

Technology policy frame
During the 1970s, the STI policy frame expanded towards a more dedicated focus on science-based
technologies (e.g. nuclear power, computer and space technology). Bengt-Åke Lundvall and Susana
Borrás (2005:
9) ote that te h olog poli
ep ese ts a shift f o
oade philosophi al
considerations to a more instrumental focus o atio al p estige a d e o o i o je ti es . At this
time, technology policy thinking was strongly influenced by economic ideas (Edler 2003) and was
perceived as a useful tool for solving wider economic problems in the aftermath of the oil crisis
(Biegelbauer and Borrás 2003). As perception of global industrial competition increased, national
governments used technolog poli fo p o oti g thei
atio al ha pio s in specific sectors
(Lundvall and Borrás 2005). The widely used rhetoric of national and European competitiveness has
been criticised by Paul Krugman (1994) as a meaningless concept when applied to national economies
because countries do not go out of business like companies and the international economy is not a
zero sum game. K ug a alls o petiti e ess a da ge ous o sessio , because it can lead to wrong
policies and wasteful government spending while ignoring the real causes of economic problems.
Concerns about the impact of science and technology were raised by the new social (anti-war, feminist
and environmental) movements that emerged in the late 1960s. They facilitated focus on
democratization, public participation and the social relevance of science and technology and
contributed to interest in technology assessment and foresight of broader impacts of future
technologies (Elzinga and Jamison 1995). One of the major contributions to discussing social questions
of technology at that time was Nelso s 9
ook The Moon a d the Ghetto , which focussed on
uneven technological progress whereas some socio-political issues have been tackled more
successfully than others:
a country that recently had accomplished the truly remarkable feat of sending a man to the
moon and bringing him back to earth safely, had wiped out scourges of infantile paralysis, and
more generally had achieved an historically unprecedented standard of living for the middle
class, for some reason seemed unable to provide an effective education for ghetto kids, halt
or significantly slow down the rising cost of medical care, keep the air and water clean or cut
down on the incidence of drug addiction and drug-related crime (Nelson 2011: 681).
To summarize, the technology policy frame presents science and technology as instruments to achieve
economic competitiveness. Simultaneously, growing societal concerns over new technologies lead to
increased public participation, technological forecasting and attention to the social implications of
technological development.

Innovation policy frame
Gradually the policy frame evolved and expanded further to what became known as innovation policy
in the 1990s. Building on earlier ideas about innovation, this policy frame emphasised collaboration,
diffusion and the need for a systemic approach. The linear model of innovation was replaced by a
chain-link model incorporating feedback loops and multiple paths of innovation (Kline and Rosenberg
1986), demonstrating that rather than being a smooth and linear process, innovation is complex,
uncertain and somewhat disorderly. A related idea on the importance of policy supporting the

35

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

diffusion of innovation was put forward by Henry Ergas (1987), who made a famous distinction
between mission-oriented policies promoting the development of new technologies and diffusionoriented policies supporting the widespread dissemination of capacities of firms to respond to new
technologies.
Particularly influential in this policy frame is the innovation systems approach3 focussing on the role
of historically developed institutions and interactions between them in explaining innovation (Lundvall
1992). The crucial role of interaction among diverse institutions has been emphasised by a number of
other approaches emerging approximately at the same time, such as triple helix, third mission and
Mode 2 knowledge production. According to the Triple Helix model (Leydesdorff and Etzkowitz 1996),
university-industry-government relations play a crucial role in knowledge production, and universities
– also known as entrepreneurial universities - undertake important economic functions. Similarly, the
o ept of the thi d issio of universities (Goransson et al. 2009) envisages an extension of the
university s role beyond teaching and research to include its socio-economic contribution as well. The
idea of Mode 2 knowledge production (Gibbons et al. 1994) argues that Mode 1, characterized by
knowledge production in an academic context, disciplinarity, homogeneity, autonomy and traditional
quality control (peer review), is being replaced by the Mode 2 where knowledge is produced in the
context of application, transdisciplinarity, heterogeneity, reflexivity, social accountability and novel
quality control. Innovation policy translated these ideas into instruments supporting networks and
capacity building, small and medium-sized enterprises and intellectual property rights. Susana Borrás
(2003: 17) distinguishes between a narrow innovation policy agenda focussing directly on supporting
innovation and a wide innovation policy agenda including policies such as education and training,
competition and infrastructure.
A lot of the economic thinking that had influenced STI policy ideas since the 1970s was reinforced
during the 1990s through the introduction of the New Public Management (NPM) ideas, which
promoted the introduction of private sector management techniques in public policy. For STI policy,
NPM meant an increased focus on the evaluation of quantifiable results and competitive resource
allocation (Elzinga 2012: 426). The appropriateness of NPM ideas for STI policy has been widely
debated because they differ considerably from sociological views on the organization of the research
community (Hagstrom 1965; Merton 1942). The limits of organizing research systems according to
market principles have been pointed out (Georghiou 2006).
To summarize, the innovation policy frame aims for a more systematic approach to knowledge
production and diffusion. Accordingly, it emphasises accountability and collaboration among research
organizations, business, government and society. While the main focus of the innovation policy frame
is on interactions and linkages between heterogeneous actors involved in the innovation process, the
cumulative expansion of the STI policy frame means that this frame includes ideas from the previous
frames (e.g. importance of research infrastructure, foresight, training of young scientists), though
some of these ideas have been revised (e.g. chain-link model of innovation replacing linear model) or
integrated in a new context (e.g. basic science organizations being one of the institutions in the
innovation system rather than playing a dominant role as in the earlier science policy frame).
The main ideas of an evolving STI policy frame are summarized in Box 1. This historical review of the
broadening STI policy frame helps to interpret ideas, rationales, values and interests involved in
toda s esea h poli
d a i g atte tio to the o ti uatio a d deepe i g of old issues i e
fo s Elzi ga
: 426).

36

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

Box 1: Stylized evolution of the main ideas of science, technology and innovation policy
Science policy

Technology policy

Innovation policy

since 1940s

since 1970s

since 1990s

Social function of science

Science-based tech

Innovation system

Scientific freedom

Economic goals

Chain-link model

Big science – infrastructure

Global competition

Diffusion

Education of young scientists

National prestige

Mode 2

National champions

Triple Helix

Foresight

Third mission

Social concerns

New public management

As pointed out by Borrás (2003: 13), this three-step evolution of STI poli is a a al ti al odel fo
heu isti pu poses hi h has ot al a s ee strictly followed in practice. For example, while policy
thinking in recent decades has emphasised the non-linear character of innovation and social
accountability associated with Mode 2 knowledge production, in policy practice and debates it is still
possible to encounter the linear model of innovation and Mertonian norms of disinterestedness.
Borrás elaborates on the complexity of capturing policy evolution, stating it is
a st lized fa t of the t a sfo atio s taki g pla e th ough histo . I this e olutio the e is
not necessarily an overall predetermined rationality constantly improving it, as if there was
a e d of histo where policy achieves a perfect, ultimate, formulation. Policy changes are
the fruit of many complex factors, which are socially, politically, and economically embedded,
and that are not necessarily improvements of one single course of history (Borrás 2003: 14).
Accordingly, this article will use the main long-standing ideas from STI policy discussed above for
analysing the evolution of the ideational framework of the ERA initiative. In this analysis, policy
evolution is understood not as a predetermined rational and purposeful process but rather as a
constant adaptation to a changing social, political and economic environment (Borrás 2003).

EVOLUTION OF THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA INITIATIVE
The policy framing perspective is seen as particularly relevant for structuring political conflict and
competition at the European level, characterized by competing constituencies and contested
competencies (Daviter 2007). Some earlier studies have analysed the cognitive dimensions of the EU
research policy a d alled fo
i gi g ideas a k i to account for its evolution (Sanz-Menendez
and Borrás 2001). Taki g a i d e e s ie of the history of EU research policy since the establishment
of the EU, Borrás (2003: ) lai s its e olutio a e portrayed as the transition from science policy,
to te h olog poli , a d fi all to i o atio poli .4 In particular, she takes a close look at the
t a sitio f o EU te h olog poli to i o atio poli
in the mid-1990s, arguing that while the
main EU innovation policy documents at that time take a narrow view on innovation policy, actual EU

37

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

activities towards supporting innovation go far beyond this narrow view and include areas such as
education, small and medium-sized enterprises, regional policy, information society and competition
policy (Borrás 2003: 17-20). A i po ta t ole i this i o atio tu in EU policy framing was played
by expert communities in the OECD and national and Commission policy fora (Sanz-Menendez and
Borrás 2001). Additionally, some studies have analysed the framing of the specific EU initiatives; for
example, Jakob Edler (2003) studied the influence of economic ideas on the EU research programme
BRITE (Basic Research in Industrial Technologies for Europe) in the 1980s.
The ERA initiative launched in 2000 emerged during the most recent innovation policy frame. The
earlier discussion of the long-term development of STI policy ideas helps to make sense of the
development of ideas, values and interests involved in the ideational framework of the ERA initiative.
This paper traces the evolution of the ERA initiative and its main goals from its launch in 2000 until
2014 by studying relevant literature and the main documents defining the ERA initiative (e.g. the
Co
issio s Co
u i atio s a d the Cou il s Co lusio s)5. The chronology of the key events of
the ERA initiative is outlined in Box 2.

Box 2: Evolution of the ERA initiative
2000

Launching ERA and Lisbon strategy

2002

Barcelona target of R&D funding of 3% of GDP

2002

Co

2005

Mid-term review and re-launch of Lisbon strategy

2007

ERA Green paper – public consultation

2007

Fifth f eedo

2007

European Research Council focussing on excellence established

2008

Ljubljana process on ERA governance as enhanced partnership

2009

Lisbon treaty enters into force providing treaty basis for ERA

2009

Lund declaration on Grand challenges

2010

Europe 2020 & Innovation Union

2012

ERA reform agenda and ERA Stakeholders Platform

2013

First ERA Progress Report

2014

Deadline for completing ERA

2015

ERA roadmap has to be developed

u i atio

The Eu opea ‘esea h A ea: P o idi g a e

i the si gle

a ket

38

o e tu

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

The two main phases in the development of the ERA initiative and its main ideas are distinguished
here. The initial phase, from the launch of the ERA initiative in 2000 by the Commission with the
endorsement from the Lisbon Council until the mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy in 2005, is
characterised by the dominance of economic ideas and limited involvement of member states and
stakeholders. The second phase, starting from the public consultation on the ERA in 2007, is
characterised by dedicated efforts to develop a partnership with the member states and stakeholders
and a broadening of the ERA goals to scientific excellence and societal relevance.

Phase I (2000-2006): The Commission’s i itiative do i ated by economic ideas
The European Commission launched the ERA initiative in January 2000. The initial ERA document (EC
2000) sets out rationales for establishing the ERA and lists activities it should cover. However, it does
not provide a definition of what the ERA actually is. The urgent need for European action was framed
i te s of i p o i g Eu ope s competitive position and closing the gap with the United States (US)
and Japan. The document provides data demonstrating that the EU lags behind the US and Japan on
indicators such as public and private expenditure on research and development, employment of
researchers in industry and trade in high-tech products. Concerns of the EU lagging behind the US
have been a major driving force of integration of European research policy since the 1950s (SanzMenendez and Borrás 2001: 34). An important problem identified in the initial ERA document is a lack
of coordination between national and European research policies.
To address these problems and establish the ERA, the document suggests seven action lines:
optimisation of resources and facilities at the European level, more coherent use of public instruments
and resources, more dynamic private investment, a common system of scientific and technical
reference for policy implementation, more abundant and mobile human resources, a dynamic
European landscape that is open and attractive to researchers and investment, and an area of shared
values. These seven broad lines cover diverse activities from designing effective tools to protecting
intellectual property and encouraging risk capital investment to developing a shared vision of the
ethical issues of science and technology. The use of policy instruments such as financial, legal and
coordination measures was envisaged. While the EU was – to different degrees - already dealing with
the actions listed, the novelty was bringing them together and the ambition was to develop them
further under the large-scale framework of the ERA. The Commission stated at the outset that the ERA
ill ot o e i to ei g i sta tl i its fi al fo . It ill de elop g aduall EC
).6
Borrás (2003: ) sees the a ge of topi s i the i itial E‘A do u e t as athe i p essi e a d
i te p ets it as a sig that the Co
issio has holehea tedl e
a ed the s ste i app oa h ,
aki g the p odu tio a d disse i atio of k o ledge the o e sto e of a t ul EU esea h
s ste , ell e o d the deli ited f a e o k p og a
e . Heiko Prange-Gstöhl (2010: 3) points out
that the list of activities was important for narrowing down the ERA concept in a situation when the
Commission did not provide a definition of the ERA. Thus, while a broad range of activities listed in
the ERA initial document largely fit with the dominant innovation policy frame of this time (although
questions can be asked about linkages and interactions between different activities), its main aims are
articulated in line with ideas about economic competitiveness, already familiar from the technology
policy frame. This can be explained by the specificity of innovation policy frame, i.e. its main focus on
facilitating interactions and linkages in knowledge production and diffusion, paying less attention to
ea lie
ig uestio s about the ultimate aims of policy.
The dominant economic rationales for the establishment of the ERA were strongly supported by the
Lisbon strategy, launched two months thereafter. The Lisbon strategy set an ambitious goal for the EU
in the next decade: to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the
world capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jo s a d g eate so ial ohesio

39

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

(LEC 2000). The strategy endorsed the ERA initiative and assigned it an important role in achieving the
st ateg s ai goal. Specific steps for the establishment of the ERA were outlined, including
encouragement to develop an open method of coordination for benchmarking national research
policies, identifying indicators for assessing performance and setting up a European innovation
scoreboard (LEC 2000). This focus on quantitative indicators is in line with the New Public
Management approach.
Accordingly, the Lisbon strategy established a number of quantitative targets including the so-called
Barcelona target defined in 2002 to achieve research and development (R&D) funding of three per
cent of gross domestic product (GDP) with one third coming from government funds and two thirds
contributed by the private sector (BEC 2002). The pe e t target was set taking into account the
higher R&D investment levels in the US and Japan (see Graph 1) which had already concerned EU
policy-makers for some time. While increasing R&D funding is seen as important, the need to pay
attention to quality, efficiency and composition of funding has been emphasised as well (CEU 2014).

Graph 1: Gross domestic expenditure on R&D in the Triad, 2000-2010 (% of GDP). Source: Eurostat

Less than three years after launching the ERA initiative, the Commission undertook an early review
aiming to reinvigorate it (EC 2002). In this document, the ERA concept began to emerge more clearly
as defined by three related and complementary ideas: a i te al a ket for research with free
movement of knowledge, researchers and technology; improved coordination of national research
policies; and development of European research policy that goes beyond funding activities.7 The
document states that one of the main factors hampering progress for the ERA is insufficient
participation from the member states. A low overall level of member state involvement is seen as a
major barrier to tackling weaknesses such as the fragmentation of activities and the limited degree of
coordination between national research policies. Achieving a substantial increase in member state
involvement is one of the main objectives, along with the need for increasing the impact of the
activities underway and consolidating the conceptual and policy framework in which the project is
being implemented. Similar to the initial ERA document, the Commission presented a long list of
activities to be strengthened that largely repeated those mentioned in 2000 (e.g. mobility and
infrastructure), but also emphasised some new aspects such as the international dimension of the ERA
and its openness to the world.
In 2005, the mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy found limited progress towards its ambitious aims
to become the most competitive economy. The strategy was re-launched as the Growth and Jobs
strategy based on a close partnership between the Commission and the member states8. These
developments further influenced the evolution of the ERA initiative.

40

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

Phase II (2007-2014): Developing partnership and broadening aims
After the initial review of the ERA initiative in 2002 and the mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy in
2005, the ERA initiative gradually started to be better defined, to involve more actors and to broaden
its ideational scope. While the Commission and economic ideas still played an important role, the
member states and stakeholders were increasingly involved, and ideas on scientific excellence and
addressing societal challenges acquired more prominence. The status of the ERA was strengthened by
providing the concept a basis in the Lisbon treaty, which was signed in 2007 and entered into force in
2009. Article 179 states that the EU has a o je ti e to a hie e the E‘A i hi h esea he s, s ie tifi
k o ledge a d te h olog i ulate f eel EU
).
Simultaneously, the ERA aims were more closely linked to the core of the European integration
process, namely the single market and its four freedoms. The communication on the single market (EC
2007b) introduced knowledge and innovation as its new frontier, saying the si gle a ket o igi all
conceived for an economy reliant on primary products and manufactured goods has to adapt to foster
openness and integration in a knowledge-based, service-o ie ted e o o
. The do u e t stated
that in addition to the four established freedoms of the single market – free movement of people,
goods, services and capital – the fifth f eedo of free movement of knowledge and innovation has
to be promoted.
Important changes in the ERA initiative were triggered by the 2007 ERA Green Paper (EC 2007a) that
launched a public consultation on the ERA, activating European and national policy-makers as well as
public and private research organizations to work on the creation of the ERA (Prange-Gstöhl 2010: 8).
The Green Paper states that the scientific community, business and citizens need the ERA to have the
six following features9: an adequate flow of competent researchers, a world-class research
infrastructure, excellent research institutions, effective knowledge-sharing, well-coordinated research
programmes and priorities, and a wide opening to the world.
The ERA Green Paper mentions a number of new ideas and institutions that became significant in the
following years. In particular, the social aims of research became more visible in this document. In the
context of globalization and the emerging scientific and technological powers of China and India, the
Green Paper presented the ERA as a cornerstone for a European knowledge society. The document
states the importance of research in fulfilling EU economic, social and environmental ambitions and
referred to the need of identifying major societal challenges10 jointly and for establishing joint
programmes for society-driven research. Additionally, it emphasised that European research policy
should be deeply rooted in European society and that besides the pursuit of scientific excellence, it
should support policies for sustainable development in fields of major public concern such as health,
energy and climate change. In the context of the recent deadline (set in 2010) to complete the ERA by
2014, it is interesting that the Green Paper suggested that the ERA vision may not be fully realised for
10 or 20 years – around the year 2020. The document envisaged an important role for the two new
ERA institutions – the European Research Council (ERC) and the European Institute of Technology.
The ERC launched in 2007 became a crucial element of the ERA, contributing to widening and
strengthening the ERA initiative through new ideas and support from additional stakeholders11. It was
largely built on the ideas of scientific elite about high quality research, academic freedom and selfgovernance of the research community (Luukkonen 2014). Thus, while excellence was not prominent
on the initial ERA agenda, it has become a visible part of it since 2007 (Luukkonen 2014: 33-34). The
ERC has been widely appreciated by the scientific community, which had previously been dissatisfied
with the perceived quality, applied orientation and top-down nature of the EU Framework
Programmes and wanted more funding for basic research in Europe (Luukkonen 2014: 40). The
establishment and success of the ERC broadened the ERA ideational frame with long-standing ideas
about the role of basic research and self-organization in the academic community that have been
popular since the early days of the science policy frame. The broadened STI policy frame raises

41

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

questions about how such support for asi esea h o alled frontie esea h ) interacts with
other institutions in knowledge production and diffusion process.
The increased engagement of a broader set of actors in the ERA triggered by the public consultation
on the Green Paper (EC 2007a) was strengthened by the launch of the so- alled Lju lja a p o ess
during the Slovenian presidency in 2008 (Prange-Gstöhl 2010: 9). Its core idea was to strengthen the
ERA governance as an enhanced partnership between the member states and the European
Commission with broad support from stakeholders and citizens (CEU 2008). Additionally, within the
long-term vision for the ERA, the Council emphasised the ole of the knowledge triangle of research,
innovation and education (CEU 2008).
At this time, the social aspect and public support received increased attention within the ERA
framework, in particular through the Grand Challenges concept12. In 2008, the ERA expert group
recommended that the E‘A should e o st u ted as a esse tial ele e t of Eu ope s espo se to a
series of Grand Challenges. According to them, a focus on Grand Challenges would provide substance
to the ERA and increase support for the initiative and research in general, as Grand Challenges would
aptu e pu li a d politi al i agi atio , eate idesp ead i te est a o g s ie tifi a d usi ess
communities and NGOs and inspire younger people E‘A e pert group 2008: 37).
During the Swedish presidency in 2009, the concept of Grand Challenges was put high on the European
research policy agenda by the Lund Declaration, saying European research must focus on grand
challenges of our time moving beyond rigid thematic approaches. This calls for the new deal among
European institutions and member states, in which European and national instruments are well
aligned and cooperation builds o t a spa e
a d t ust (Lund Declaration 2009). The declaration
stated that solutions have to be found in areas such as global warming, tightening supplies of energy,
water and food, ageing societies, public health, pandemics and security. To respond to the Grand
Challenges effectively, the ERA was seen as important for de elopi g processes for the identification
of Grand Challenges, which gain political support and gradually move away from current thematic
approaches, towards a structure where research priorities are ased o these G a d Challe ges . The
focus on Grand Challenges in STI policy has spread around the world during the last 10 years. It has
many similarities with earlier STI policy ideas about the social function of science and social concerns
and it re-emphasises the i po ta e of ig ideas in the innovation policy frame, which initially paid
little atte tio to the ig policy aims.
When the Lisbon strategy expired in 2010, it was replaced by the Europe 2020 strategy for smart,
sustainable and inclusive growth (EC 2010a). The Europe 2020 strategy adopted many ideas from the
Lisbon strategy including the target to invest three per cent of GDP in R&D. The ERA initiative is
particularly important for one of the seven so-called flagship initiatives of the Europe 2020 strategy,
namely the Innovation Union flagship (EC 2010b), which sets 2014 as the deadline for completing the
ERA. This target date has received some criticism for either being set too early13 or for being of limited
use for such a complex and far-reaching initiative as the ERA; as stated by a major stakeholder
organization Science Europe, the E‘A is a lo g-term project, and to strive fo its o pletio would
e to la k a itio “ ie e Eu ope
).
The deadline to complete the ERA by 2014 is an important focus of the ERA reform agenda launched
by the Commission in 2012 (EC 2012). This document provides a consolidated definition of the ERA
based on the Lisbon treaty and the Council Conclusions stating that the ERA is a u ified esea h a ea
open to the world based on the Internal market, in which researchers, scientific knowledge and
technology circulate freely and through which the Union and its Member States strengthen their
scientific and technological bases, their competitiveness and their capacity to collectively address
Grand Challe ges (EC 2012). Additionally, the document sets out five ERA priorities which combine
earlier ERA action lines (EC 2000, 2002, 2007a): more effective national research systems, optimal

42

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

transnational cooperation and competition, an open labour market for researchers, gender equality,
and optimal circulation of scientific knowledge including via the digital ERA.
As a pragmatic approach towards implementing these priorities, a reinforced partnership between
member states, the Commission and research stakeholder organizations has been suggested (EC
2012). While the gradual involvement of the stakeholders has developed since the public consultation
on the ERA Green Paper in 2007, the reinforced partnership envisages a new explicit role for the
stakeholders. This new role led to the Commission signing the first joint statement with major
stakeholder organizations (EARTO et al. 2012) to work together towards the achievement of the ERA.
In 2013 this partnership was renewed (EARTO et al. 2013) by six stakeholder organizations: the
European Association of Research and Technology Organisations (EARTO), the European University
Association (EUA), the League of European Research Universities (LERU), a Nordic research funding
organization NordForsk, an association of European research funding and performing organizations
Science Europe and the Conference of European Schools for Advanced Engineering Education and
Research (CESAER). The ERA Progress Report 2014 mentions that the Stakeholders Platform is a good
instrument, contributing to ERA policy-making and implementation (EC 2014). According to the report,
this platform could be expanded to include additional research players.
Additionally, the 2012 reform agenda envisages the development of the ERA monitoring mechanism
(EC 2012). The first comprehensive ERA Progress Report was prepared in 2013 (EC 2013). After
reviewing it, the Council (CEU 2014) invited the member states and the Commission to develop an ERA
roadmap by mid-2015 at the European level to provide a shared understanding and facilitate national
efforts in implementing ERA objectives. The ERA Progress Report 2014 (EC 2014) presents the
development of the roadmap as a major step in strengthening the implementation of the ERA. The
launch of the new funding programme Horizon 2020 in 2014 is seen as providing new momentum for
the ERA implementation (CEU 2014). The three priorities of Horizon 2020 (EC 2011) are excellent
science, societal challenges and industrial leadership14, which are related to the diverse STI policy ideas
of scientific freedom, societal relevance and economic competitiveness.
The ERA Progress Report 2014 (EC 2014) concludes that the conditions for the completion of ERA are
o i pla e, a d it is o up to Member States and research stakeholders to implement the
necessary ERA reforms and make E‘A o k . While 2014 was previously set as a deadline for
o pleti g the E‘A, the
p og ess epo t states that the o pletio of E‘A, like the i te al
market, re ai s a g adual p o ess 15 (EC 2014). To summarize, the ERA initiative has indeed developed
gradually since its launch in 2000. Initially, the Commission presented a rationale for the ERA and a
long list of activities it involves but did not even define it. It took approximately a decade for the ERA
initiative to acquire some of its essential features such as a treaty basis in 2009, explicit partnership
with stakeholders in 2012 and its first comprehensive monitoring report in 2013. Thus, during 14
years, the ERA initiative has de eloped f o the Co
issio s project dominated by economic
rationale to a broader initiative involving member states and stakeholders and having a wider range
of economic, social and scientific aims.16
The initial ERA initiative has been criticized for being a collection of activities with no vision and no
mission (Delanghe et al. 2009). Such an approach largely fits with the innovation policy frame that
emerged in the 1990s focusing mainly on interactions and linkages among institutions and actors
involved in knowledge productio a d diffusio athe tha o
ig uestio s about the vision and
mission of policy that dominated during earlier science and technology policy frames. However, during
the last ten years this innovation policy frame has been changing and ig ideas such as the need for
research to address Grand Challenges has become popular around the world. Today the ERA is still
largely characterized by a collection of activities (reforming research systems, supporting
collaboration and competition, facilitating mobility), which are regularly monitored ut big

43

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

questions of vision and mission such as societal challenges play an increasingly important role in
defining the ERA.

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK: FROM TENSIONS TO INTERACTIONS?
The long-term evolution of STI policy ideas discussed earlier helps to analyse the ideational
development of the ERA initiative and the strategic use of big ideas (such as excellent science and
Grand Challenges) to broaden support for the ERA among the research community and society.
The ERA initiative was launched at the time of a broad STI policy frame emphasizing a systematic
approach to knowledge production and diffusion. While the innovation policy frame that emerged in
the 1990s influenced the ideational framework of the ERA initiative, it does not fully explain its
development from 2000 to 2014. The initial list of ERA activities covering research, innovation and
societal involvement (EC 2000) largely corresponded to the innovation policy frame, even if the links
between different activities were not always explicit. However, the original rationale of the ERA
initiative was framed more narrowly, emphasising economic competitiveness (EC 2000), an idea,
which has been widely used in policy framing for several decades despite criticism it has received
(Krugman 1994). While the initial document (EC 2000) mentioned the need for a broad-based
debate17, social and scientific aims (known in science policy since the 1940s) were not invoked in
framing the key reasons for launching ERA.
The strong initial focus on economic aims corresponded to the goals of the Lisbon strategy with which
the ERA initiative was closely linked. Historically, economic rationales had already been at the core of
European integration. Accordingly, the ERA initiative was framed in the context of the internal/single
market and its four freedoms, i.e. as an internal market for research (EC 2002) and as the fifth freedom
(EC 2007b), although in research policy literature, the limits of organising research systems according
to market principles have been pointed out (Georghiou 2006). However, initial reviews of the ERA (EC
2002) and the Lisbon strategy showed limited success in achieving economic goals and demonstrated
the need to involve the member states.
An important change in the ERA initiative came with the Green Paper in 2007 (EC 2007a), which
launched a public consultation. In addition to economic aims it also emphasised social and scientific
goals of the ERA. The scientific elite has been supportive of the ERC funding research on topics chosen
by scientists themselves and judged by their scientific peers (Luukkonen 2014). Thus, the ideational
framework of the ERA has been extended to include long-standing ideas from an early science policy
frame such as academic freedom and self-governance (Polanyi 1962). Another institution, the
European Institute of Innovation and Technology, has been established to implement ideas of the
knowledge triangle between education, research and innovation. The concept of the knowledge
triangle largely builds on innovation policy ideas such as innovation systems (Lundvall 1992), triple
helix (Leyedesdorff and Etzkowitz 1996) and the third mission of universities (Goransson et al. 2009).
The strategic use of ideas to strengthen the ERA and enlarge its support has been particularly
emphasised in recommendations to use the concept of addressing Grand Challenges as a rationale for
the ERA (ERA Expert group 2008). The experts explicitly suggested the use of the Grand Challenges
concept as a way to increase support for the ERA initiative among political, scientific and business
communities, civil society and younger people. The Grand Challenges concept, strengthened by the
Lund Declaration in 2009, has broadened the ERA goals to addressing social issues such as health,
environment and climate change. The concept emphasises the social goals of research, which have
been a recurring theme in expanding the STI policy frame for more than half a century, e.g. in debates
about the social function of science (Bernal 1939) in the initial science policy frame, the need to

44

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

address pressing social issues (Nelson 1977) in the technology policy frame and the more recent
approach of the Mode 2 knowledge production (Gibbons et al. 1994) in the innovation policy frame.
To summarize, linking the ideational framework of the ERA initiative to long-standing STI policy ideas
(for an overview see Table 1) also helps to analyse the broadening of the ERA aims and to understand
the ERA initiative within the broader context of research policy ideas
d a i g atte tio to the
continuation and deepening of old issues i e fo s (Elzinga 2012: 426).

Table 1: Main ideas in the ERA initiative and their roots in long-term STI policy ideas
Main ideas in the ERA initiative

Their roots in long-term STI policy ideas

Contribution to international economic
competitiveness, internal market,
fifth
f eedo

Economic perspectives of 1970s on
contribution of STI to global competiveness

Scientific excellence, frontier research,
autonomy, European Research Council

Scientific freedom (Polanyi 1962; Bush 1945)

Grand/societal challenges

Social function of science (Bernal 1939), solving
social problems (Nelson 1977), Mode 2

Knowledge triangle of education, research and
innovation, EIT

Innovation systems, triple helix, third mission

Monitoring: Lisbon strategy, Europe 2020,
Scoreboards, Progress Reports

New Public Management, quantification of
objectives

Thus, the broadened ERA ideational frame18 as found in a recently consolidated ERA definition (EC
) a d Ho izo
p io ities i ludes disti t, et utuall ei fo i g, p io ities EC 2011) of
scientific excellence, societal challenges and economic competitiveness. While these different ideas
coexist and ensure a broader support for the ERA initiative, links and relationships between them are
underdeveloped. It remains to be seen if and how the ERC grants supporting excellent science could
be mutually reinforced with projects addressing societal challenges and promoting industrial
leadership. This lack of interactions between diverse ideas in science, technology and innovation
policy is not unique to the ERA initiative. Research policy studies have paid relatively little attention
to the interactions among these diverse ideas. While tensions among them have been emphasised
(Borrás 2012; Nelson 1977), possibilities to combine diverse ideas of excellence and relevance (Irwin
2014; Rip 2011) need to be further explored and conceptualized. Further articulation of tensions and
interactions among diverse policy aims and specific instruments designed to implement them could
facilitate the development of a more comprehensive ERA frame.
***

Correspondence address
Inga Ulnicane, Institute for European Integration Research EIF, University of Vienna, Strohgasse
45/DG, 1030 Vienna, Austria [inga.ulnicane@univie.ac.at]

45

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

1I

this pape , the te

s s ie e, te h olog a d i

Inga Ulnicane

o atio poli

a d esea h poli

a e used as synonyms.

2 Known by their abbreviation as CUDOS norms, see Elzinga 2012.
3 Including national, regional, sectoral and trans-national innovation systems.
4 For an elaboration of a similar argument see Sanz-Menendez and Borrás 2001.
5 The Commission has prepared detailed documents on specific aspects of the ERA initiative such as mobility,

infrastructures and networking of national programmes (EC 2002). An analysis of all of these numerous documents is far
beyond the scope of this paper, which focusses on the key documents defining overall objectives and activities of the ERA
initiative. Detailed information on specific aspects of the ERA initiative can be found on the official ERA website
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/index_en.htm. Accessed 2 August 2014.
6 Lepo i et al.
:
) state that the E‘A ep ese ted i
a e pt f a e of efe e e . Ho e e , this state e t is
not based on the analysis of the ERA initiative and relevant documents but on the study of one specific element of the ERA,
namely joint European research programmes, the majority of which were launched after 2000. Against the background of
the ERA initial document (EC 2000) listing numerous ongoing activities, their general statement about the ERA can be
questioned.
7 This approach to the ERA concept as combining these three elements is also used later in the ERA Green Paper (EC
2007a).
8 For more information on the Lisbon strategy for Growth and Jobs see its official website
http://ec.europa.eu/archives/growthandjobs_2009/. Accessed 2 August 2014.
9 These six features largely consolidate action lines mentioned in the initial ERA documents (EC 2000, 2002).
10 At this ti e, the o ept of G a d/“o ietal Challe ges
as e o i g popula i “TI poli a ou d the o ld, i
particular after the Gates Foundation launched its Grand Challenges in Global Health initiative in 2003. Available at
http://grandchallenges.org/. Accessed 27 October 2014.
11 In the ERA reform programme (EC 2012), the ERC is mentioned as one of the examples of progress in building the ERA.
12 The o ept of “o ietal Challe ges used i “TI poli
i te ha gea l ith G a d Challe ges ) as al ead
mentioned in the ERA Green Paper (EC 2007a).
13 It is earlier than 2020, as mentioned in the ERA Green Paper (EC 2007a).
14 The details on the implementation of these three priorities are provided on the Horizon 2020 official website
http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/h2020-sections. Accessed 2 August 2014.
15 The idea that the ERA will develop gradually was mentioned already in the initial document launching the ERA initiative
(EC 2000).
16 To implement these aims, a range of financial, coordination and legal instruments are used including new funding
schemes within the recent EU Framework Programmes (Edler and Kuhlmann 2011), joint funding programmes among the
member states (Lepori et al. 2014) and Open Method of Coordination (De Ruiter 2010). A variety of policy instruments
addresses issues such as research careers (Chou and Real-Dato 2014), citizen participation and infrastructure (Ryan
forthcoming). An analysis of these instruments and their implementation is beyond the scope of this article.
17 It was stated that this broad- ased de ate should u fold fi st a d fo e ost i the Eu opea i stitutio s ; o l
afte a ds as it e tio ed that it is also esse tial to hea the ie s of the s ie tifi o
u it , the o ld of i dust
a d, o e oadl
i il so iet , a d the e e states ould e i ited to o ga ize de ates at atio al a d egio al
levels (EC 2000).
18 The findings on the broadening of the main aims of the ERA initiative in this paper are similar to the observations of
Meng-Hsuan Chou (2014) on the ideational widening of the ERA concept and Terttu Luukkonen (2014) on the evolved ERA
concept.

46

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

REFERENCES
BEC (Barcelona European Council) (2002). Presidency Conclusions, 15 and 16 March.
Bernal, J.D. (1939 [1967]). The Social Function of Science. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Biegelbauer, P.S. and Borrás, S. (2003). Introduction: Ideas and the Transition from Technology to Innovation Policy , in P.S.
Biegelbauer and S. Borrás (eds.) Innovation Policies in Europe and the US. The New Agenda. Aldershot: Ashgate: 1-15.
Boekholt, P. (2010). The Evolution of Innovation Paradigms and their Influence on Research, Technological Development
and Innovation Policy Instruments , in R.E. Smits, S. Kuhlmann and P. Shapira (eds.) The Theory and Practice of Innovation
Policy. An International Research Handbook. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 333-359.
Borrás, S. (2012). Three Tensions in the Governance of Science and Technology , in D. Levi-Faur (ed.) Oxford Handbook of
Governance. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 429-440.
Borrás, S. (2003). The Innovation Policy of the European Union. From Government to Governance. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar.
Bush, V. (1945). Science The Endless Frontier. Washington: United States Government Printing Office.
CEU (Council of the European Union) (2014). Conclusions on progress in the European Research Area. 21 February,
Brussels.
CEU (Council of the European Union) (2008). Conclusions on the launch of the Lju lja a P o ess - towards full realisation
of ERA, 28-29 May, Brussels.
Chou, M.H. (2014). The evolution of the European Research Area as an idea in European integration , in M.H. Chou and Å.
Gornitzka (eds.) Building the Knowledge Economy in Europe. New Constellations in European Research and Higher
Education. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 27-50.
Chou, M.H. and Real-Dato, J. (2014). T a slati g the Eu opea Cha te fo Researchers and the Code of Conduct for the
Recruitment of Resea he s i national arenas: Norway vs Spain , in M.H. Chou and Å. Gornitzka (eds.) Building the
Knowledge Economy in Europe. New Constellations in European Research and Higher Education. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar:
51-80.
Daviter, F. (2007). Policy Framing in the European Union. Journal of European Public Policy, 14(4): 654-666.
Delanghe, H., Muldur, U. and Soete, L. (eds.) (2009). European Science and Technology Policy. Towards Integration for
Fragmentation?. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
De Ruiter, R. (2010). Variations on a Theme. Governing the Knowledge-Based Society in the EU through Methods of Open
Coordination in Education and R&D. Journal of European Integration, 32(2): 157-173.
EARTO, EUA, LERU, NordForsk, Science Europe, CESAER and European Commission (2013). Joint Declaration on Working in
Partnership in Achieving the European Research Area, Brussels.
EARTO, EUA, LERU, NordForsk, Science Europe and European Commission (2012). Joint Statement on Working in
Partnership in Achieving the European Research Area, Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2014). European Research Area. Progress Report 2014. 15 September. COM(2014) 575,
Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2013). European Research Area. Progress Report 2013. 20 September. COM(2013) 637,
Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2012). A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth.
Communication 17 July. COM(2012) 392, Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2011). Horizon 2020 – The Framework Programme for Research and Innovation.
Communication 30 November. COM(2011) 808, Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2010a). Europe 2020 A strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Communication 3
March. COM(2010) 2020, Brussels.

47

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

EC (European Commission) (2010b). Europe 2020 Flagship Initiative Innovation Union. Communication 6 October.
COM(2010) 546, Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2007a). The European Research Area: New Perspectives. Green Paper 4 April. COM(2007) 161,
Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2007b). A single market for 21st century. Communication 20 November. COM(2007) 724,
Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2002). The European Research Area: Providing new momentum. Communication 16 October.
COM(2002) 565, Brussels.
EC (European Commission) (2000). Towards a European Research Area. Communication 18 January. COM(2000) 6, Brussels.
Edler, J. (2003). How Do Economic Ideas Become Relevant in RTD Policy Making? Lessons From a European Case Study, in
P.S.Biegelbauer and S.Borrás (eds.) Innovation Policies in Europe and the US. The New Agenda. Aldershot: Ashgate: 253284.
Edler, J. and Kuhlmann, S. (2011). Integration of European Research Systems: A Multi Dimensional Phenomenon , in
D.Jansen (ed.) Towards a European Research Area. Baden-Baden: Nomos: 71-96.
Edler, J., Kuhlmann, S. and Behrens, M. (eds.) (2003). Changing Governance of Research and Technology Policy: The
European Research Area. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Elzinga, A. (2012). Features of the current science policy regime: Viewed in historical perspective. Science and Public Policy
39 (4): 416-428.
Elzinga, A. and Jamison, A. (1995). Changing Policy Agendas in Science and Technology , in S. Jasanoff, G.E. Markle, J.C.
Peterson and T. Pinch (eds.) Handbook of Science and Technology Studies. Thousand Oaks: Sage: 572-597.
ERA Expert Group (2008). Challe gi g Europe’s Resear h: Ratio ales for the Europea Resear h Area ERA , Report,
Brussels.
Ergas, H. (1987). The importance of technology policy , in P. Dasgupta and P. Stoneman (eds.) Economic policy and
technological performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 51-96.
EU (European Union) (2010). Consolidated Treaties. Charter of Fundamental Rights. Luxembourg: Publications Office if the
European Union.
Georghiou, L. (2006). Innovation, Learning, and Macro-institutional Change: The Limits of the Market Model as an
Organizing Principle for Research Systems , in J. Hage and M. Meeus (eds.) Innovation, Science, and Institutional Change. A
Research Handbook. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 217-231.
Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwartzman, S., Scott, P. and Trow, M. (1994). The New Production of Knowledge:
The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Goransson, B., Maharajh, R. and Schmoch, U. (2009). Introduction: New challenges for universities beyond education and
research. Science and Public Policy, 36(2): 83-84.
Guston, D.H. (2012). The Pumpkin or the Tiger? Michael Polanyi, Frederick Soddy, and Anticipating Emerging Technologies.
Minerva, 50(3): 363-379.
Hagstrom, W.O. (1965). The Scientific Community. New York: Basic Books.
Irwin, A. (2014). Excellence and responsibility in social scientific research: both, neither, either/or?. Keynote speech at the
conference Changing Worlds: Ideologies, Utopias and Ambitions in Science and Technology. University of Vienna, 20-22
November.
Kline, S.J. and N. Rosenberg (1986). An Overview of Innovation , in R. Landau and N. Rosenberg (eds.) The Positive Sum
Strategy: Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth. Washington, DC: National Academy Press: 275-305.
Krugman, P. (1994) Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession. Foreign Affairs, 73(2): 28-44.
LEC (Lisbon European Council) (2000). Presidency Conclusions, 23 and 24 March.

48

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Inga Ulnicane

Lepori, B., Reale, E. and Laredo P. (2014). Logi s of i teg atio a d a to s st ategies in European joint programs. Research
Policy, 43(2): 391-402.
Leydesdorff, L. and Etzkowitz, H. (1996). Emergence of a Triple Helix of university-industry-government relations. Science
and Public Policy, 23(5): 279-286.
Lund Declaration (2009). Europe must focus on the grand challenges of our time, Lu d o fe e e New Worlds - New
“olutio s , Jul
9.
Lundvall, B.A. (ed.) (1992). National Innovation Systems: Towards a Theory of Innovation and Interactive Learning. London:
Pinter.
Lundvall, B.A. and Borrás, S. (2005). Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy , in J. Fagerberg, D.C. Mowery and R.R.
Nelson (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 599-631.
Luukkonen, T. (2014). The European Research Council and the European research funding landscape. Science and Public
Policy, 41(1): 29-43.
Merton, R. (1942 [1973]). The Normative Structure of Science , in R. Merton and N. Storer (eds.) The Sociology of Science.
Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press: 267-278.
Nelson, R.R. (2011). The Moon and The Ghetto revisited. Science and Public Policy, 38(9): 681-690.
Nelson, R.R. (1977). The Moon and the Ghetto. An Essay on Public Policy Analysis. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Peterson, J. and Sharp, M. (1998). Technology Policy in the European Union. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Pielke Jr., R. (2014). In Retrospect: The Social Function of Science. Nature, 507(7493): 427-428.
Pielke J ., ‘.

). Basic Resea h as a Politi al “

ol. Minerva 50(3): 339-361.

Polanyi, M. (1962). The Republic of Science. Its Political and Economic Theory. Minerva. 1(1): 54-73.
Prange-Gstöhl, H. (2010). The Eu opea ‘esea h A ea goes glo al : a introduction , in H. Prange-Gstöhl (ed.)
International Science and Technology Cooperation in a Globalized World. The External Dimension of the European Research
Area. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 1-27.
Price, D.J.D. (1963). Little Science, Big Science. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rein, M. and Schön, D. (1993). Reframing Policy Discourse , in F. Fischer and J. Forester (eds.) The Argumentative Turn in
Policy Analysis and Planning. London: UCL Press: 145-166.
Rip, A. (2011). The future of research universities. Prometheus 29(4): 443-453.
Rip, A. (1994). The republic of science in the 1990s. Higher Education 28(1): 3-23.
Ryan, L. (forthcoming). Governance of EU research policy: Charting forms of scientific democracy in the European Research
Area. Science and Public Policy.
Sanz-Menendez, L. and Borrás, S. (2001). Explaining Changes and Continuity in EU Technology Policy: The Politics of Ideas ,
in S. Dresner and N. Gilbert (eds.) The Dynamics of European Science and Technology Policies. Aldershot: Ashgate: 28-51.
Science Europe (2013). Science Europe Roadmap. Brussels.
Ziman, J.M. (1983). The collectivization of science. The Bernal lecture, 1983. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B
219 (1214): 1-19.

49

