210163 EC SE: Erweiterungscurriculum

The EU's regulatory policies

2016 Summer Semester, 5 ECTS, University of Vienna
Thursdays 9:45-11:15 am, 10.03.-30.06.2016., Hörsaal 2 (A218), NIG 2nd floor
Dr. Inga Ulnicane, Assistant Professor, Institute for European Integration Research EIF, University of
Vienna inga.ulnicane@univie.ac.at

Course aims
The course introduces to EU policy-making and the main EU policies. Questions addressed in this
course include: How are EU policies made and implemented? How do EU policies affect the EU
member states and citizens? What are the main challenges in making and implementing the EU
policies in 28 member states and how can these challenges be addressed? The course provides
overview of different stages of EU policy-making: agenda setting, policy formulation, decision-making,
implementation and policy-feedback. Additionally, the course discusses the main ideal-types of EU
policy process: the community method, the regulatory mode, the distributive mode, policy
coordination and intensive transgovernmentalism. EU policies studied in the course include single
market, agriculture, regions, asylum and immigration, and energy.

This course is one of the three courses taught by the EIF in the Erweiterungscurriculum ‘European
Integration and global multi-level governance’, which aims to introduce non-Political Science
students to the European Union. It is complementary to other two courses in this curriculum, namely,
the EU institutions and decision-making processes, and the EU and global governance.

Main topics and course structure
The course consists of the three main parts:
PART I Introduction to EU policy-making: policy cycle and different modes of policy-making
PART II Investigating EU policies: Single Market, Economic and Monetary Union, Energy, Agriculture,
Regions, Asylum and immigration
PART III EU regulation of health, technology and innovation: Genetically Modified Organisms, Food,
and Nanotechnology

1

Course requirements, criteria and assessment
1. Active participation. Attendance is mandatory. Criteria: demonstrates close reading of and
reflection on the texts; providing constructive feedback on contributions from the colleagues.
20% of the final grade
2. Reading the course literature and preparing five reflection papers. Criteria: Identification of
the main ideas and concepts in the texts, own reflection, questions and suggestions for
discussion. 20% of the final grade
3. Presentation (20 minutes) in a small team. Criteria: Interesting and engaging presentation
providing a good introduction to the topic and putting forward questions for discussion. 20%
of the final grade
4. Written exam 30 June. Criteria: good knowledge and understanding of the topics discussed
in the course. 40% of the final grade

Reflection papers on the readings
To prepare for the seminar discussion, one page reflection papers on the week’s readings (sent via
email to the course participants) have to be submitted on Tuesdays 18:00 via Moodle 5 times during
semester: before 17.03; 7.04; 14.04; 21.04; 12.05. Brief reflection papers (1 page per week) should
address:
•
•

•
•

Main ideas and concepts in the readings
Your own reflection:
o strengths and weaknesses of the articles,
o what is particularly interesting in the texts,
o how do they relate to the other texts and topics discussed in the course
Any ideas and concepts that are unclear and/or need to be further discussed in the seminar
Questions for discussion

In your reflection papers, clearly distinguish your own ideas from those of the authors of the
assigned texts. Write your own text. Copying and pasting sentences from the assigned texts in your
reflection paper is not allowed.
Guidelines for the reflection papers are also helpful for reading the assigned texts for those weeks
when reflection papers are not requested: look for the main ideas and concepts in the texts, consider
their strengths and weaknesses, think about questions for discussion, etc.
Preparing reflection papers and regularly reading the assigned texts before the class is very good
preparation for the final written exam at the end of the semester.

2

Presentations
The aim of the presentations is to introduce a specific EU policy field and kick-off the class
discussions. Eight presentations will take place from 14 April until 23 June. Each presentation will be
prepared by a small team of 4-5 people. Signing up for presentations will take place on 17 March.
Each group will prepare approximately 20 minutes presentation using PowerPoint slides which will
later be made available on Moodle.
Research-based presentation should address the following topics:
•
•
•
•
•
•

What are the EU competencies in a particular policy field?
Which mode of policy-making EU is using in a particular policy field (e.g. regulation,
coordination, distribution)?
Why is this policy field important?
What are the main policy decisions and instruments in this policy field?
What are the main controversies and current debates in this policy filed?
Questions for the class discussion

Where to look for information needed to prepare presentations? Some initial suggestions
Assigned texts for each week are a good starting point but to prepare an excellent presentation you
should draw on additional high quality academic and policy sources (which should be referenced in
the presentation).
Books and special issues
Falkner, G. (ed) (2016) EU Policies in Times of Crisis, special issue in Journal of European Integration
38(3): 219-374.
Wallace, H., Pollack, M. and Young, A. (eds.) 2015: Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th edition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Academic Journals
Journal of European Public Policy
JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies
Journal of European Integration
Websites: Institutions, think tanks & news
European Commission
Centre for European Policy Studies
Bruegel
EUobserver
3

Preliminary course plan
PART I Introduction to EU policy-making
1. March 10 Introduction to the course and to the topic
2. March 17 Understanding EU policy-making [REFLECTION PAPER 1]
Wallace, H., Pollack, M., and Young, A. (2015) Overview, in Wallace, H., Pollack, M. and Young, A.
(eds.) Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 3-11.
Young, A. (2015) The European Policy Process in Comparative Perspective, in Wallace, H., Pollack, M.
and Young, A. (eds.) Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th edition. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 46-71.
3. April 7 Different modes of EU policy-making [REFLECTION PAPER 2]
Wallace, H. and Reh, C. (2015) An Institutional Anatomy and Five Policy Modes, in Wallace, H.,
Pollack, M. and Young, A. (eds.) Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th edition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp.72-112.
Majone, G. (1994) The Rise of Regulatory State in Europe West European Politics 17 (3): 77-101.

PART II Investigating EU policies
4. April 14 Single Market [REFLECTION PAPER 3] [PRESENTATION 1]
Young, A. (2015) The Single Market: From Stagnation to Renewal? in Wallace, H., Pollack, M. and
Young, A. (eds.) Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp.115-140.
5. April 21 Economic and Monetary Union [REFLECTION PAPER 4] [PRESENTATION 2]
Hodson, D. (2015) Policy-Making under Economic and Monetary Union: Crisis, Change, and
Continuity, in Wallace, H., Pollack, M. and Young, A. (eds.) Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th
edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.166-195.
6. April 28 Special event 14 March 17:00 ‘A cornerstone of EU enlargement Policy; The Energy
Community Ten Years After’, House of the EU, Wipplingerstrasse 35, 1010 Vienna
7. May 5 Ascension Day – National holiday
8. May 12 Common Agricultural Policy [REFLECTION PAPER 5] [PRESENTATION 3]
Roederer-Rynning, C. (2015) The Common Agricultural Policy: The Fortress Challenged, in Wallace, H.,
Pollack, M. and Young, A. (eds.) Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th edition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp.196-219.

4

9. May 19 Regional Policy [PRESENTATION 4]
Bache, I. (2015) Cohesion Policy: A New Direction for New Times? in Wallace, H., Pollack, M. and
Young, A. (eds.) Policy-Making in the European Union, 7th edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp.243-262.
10. May 26 Corpus Christi – National holiday
11. June 2 Asylum and immigration [PRESENTATION 5]
Trauner, F. (2016) Asylum policy: the EU’s ‘Crises’ and the looming policy regime failure, Journal of
European Integration 38(3):311-325.

PART III EU regulation of health, technology and innovation
12. June 9 Genetically Modified Organisms [PRESENTATION 6]
Borras, S. (2006) Legitimate governance of risk at the EU level? The case of genetically modified
organisms Technological Forecasting & Social Change 73: 61-75.
Drott, L., Jochum, L., Lange, F., Skierka, I., Vach, J. and van Asselt, M. (2013) Accountability and risk
governance: a scenario-informed reflection on European regulation of GMOs, Journal of Risk
Research 16(9): 1123-1140.
13. June 16 Food [PRESENTATION 7]
Moors, E. (2012) Functional foods: regulation and innovations in the EU, Innovation: The European
Journal of Social Science 25(4):424-440.
Kurzer, P. and Cooper, A. (2013) Biased or not? Organized interests and the case of EU food
information labelling, Journal of European Public Policy 20(5): 722-740.
14. June 23 Nanotechnology [PRESENTATION 8]
Justo-Hanoni, R. and Dayan, T. (2015) European risk governance of nanotechnology: explaining the
emerging regulatory policy Research Policy 44: 1527-1536.
Shelley-Egan, C. and Bowman, D. (2015) The Challenge of Distributing Regulatory Responsibilities for
Unknown Risks: ‘Nano’-Cosmetics and the EU Cosmetics Regulation as a Case Study, Clinical Research
& Bioethics 6(2).

15. June 30 Written exam 10:00-11:15
1. Explain differences between the following stages of economic integration: Free Trade Area,
Customs Union, Single Market and Economic and Monetary Union! 10%

5

2. Explain the Single Market and the ‘four freedoms’! What role do they play in the European
Union? Why regulation is important in the Single Market? What problems does regulation or
a lack of it can cause for the Single Market? 40%
3. One of the key features of EU’s regulatory policies is precautionary principle. What does this
principle mean? Mention examples of its use! What are advantages and disadvantages of this
principle? What are alternatives? 25%
4. A typical tool used in EU regulatory policies is labelling of products. What is the purpose of
labelling? Mention examples from the course texts about when and how labelling is used!
What are arguments for and against labelling and which institutions and actors are using
these arguments? 25%

PART IV (OPTIONAL) Vienna Lectures on the European Union (organized by the EIF)
•

•

30.Mai 2016, 17:00 Aula, Universitätscampus Die EU nach dem Pariser Klima-Abkommen –
Vorreiterposition trotz interner Handlungsblockaden? Vortrag: Oliver Geden (Stiftung
Wissenschaft und Politik, Berlin). Kommentare: Franz Wirl (Institut für
Betriebswirtschaftslehre, Universität Wien) und Daniel Ennöckl (Institut für Staats- und
Verwaltungsrecht, Universität Wien).

20 June 2016, 16:00 Aula, Campus of the University The Rise of the European Consolidation
State Lecture: Wolfgang Streeck (Director Emeritus, Max Planck Institute for the Study of
Societies) Comments: Ulrich Brand (Faculty of Social Sciences, Department of Political
Science) and Jörg Flecker (Faculty of Social Sciences, Department of Sociology).

6

