210076 SE BAK 11: SE European Union and Europeanisation

Policies and politics for a knowledge-based society in Europe
2017 Summer Semester, 6 ECTS, BA Political Science, University of Vienna
Thursdays 15:00-16:30, Hörsaal 42 Main Building, 2nd floor, Stairway 7
9 March-29 June 2017
Dr. Inga Ulnicane inga.ulnicane@univie.ac.at

‘It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of
foolishness…’
Charles Dickens (1859) ‘A Tale of Two Cities’

Aims, contents & method of the course
This course aims to provide a broad understanding and knowledge about the role of policies and
politics in developing a knowledge-based society in Europe. It introduces the key contemporary
academic concepts and approaches to analyzing the role of policy and politics in building a
knowledge-based society, and reviews the main policies in this area including research and
innovation, higher education, talent mobility and regulation of emerging sciences and technologies.
It focuses on multi-level policies and politics in Europe including EU, national and regional levels and
compares developments in Europe to processes in other major as well as emerging powers e.g. in the
US and Asia. Weekly meetings aim to facilitate an in-depth understanding and critical reflection on a
broad range of topics, while research paper allows developing expertise on one relevant and exciting
research question.
Weekly meetings involve reflexive discussions of readings and research paper proposals, team work,
data analysis, presentations and provision of feedback. Brief reflection papers (1 page) on the
selected readings help analyzing texts and topics. Preparation of research paper is supported by
discussion of essay proposal and providing feedback on essay presentation.

Requirements and assessment criteria
1. Active participation. Criteria: demonstrates close reading of and reflection on the texts;
providing constructive feedback on contributions from the colleagues 20%
2. Analyzing course literature including preparing 1 page reflection papers on selected readings.
Criteria: Identification of the main ideas and concepts in the texts, own reflection, questions
and suggestions for discussion – 20%
1

3. Presentation of research paper proposal. Criteria: Interesting and engaging presentation of
the topic, research questions and design – 20%
4. Research paper. Criteria: systematic and consistent exploration of an interesting, relevant
and clear research questions using appropriate data and relevant academic literature,
leading to robust findings – 40%

Reflection papers on the readings
To prepare for the seminar discussion, one page reflection papers on the week’s readings have to be
submitted on Tuesdays 18:00 via Moodle 2 times during semester: before 23.3. and 6.4. Brief
reflection papers (1 page per week) should address:
•
•

•
•

Main ideas and concepts in the readings
Your own reflection:
o strengths and weaknesses of the articles,
o what is particularly interesting in the texts,
o how do they relate to the other texts and topics discussed in the course,
o what can you learn from the texts for your own research paper
Any ideas and concepts that are unclear and/or need to be further discussed in the seminar
Questions for discussion

In your reflection papers, clearly distinguish your own ideas from those of the authors of the
assigned texts. Write your own text. Copying and pasting sentences from the assigned texts in your
reflection paper is not allowed.
Guidelines for the reflection papers are also helpful for reading the assigned texts for those weeks
when reflection papers are not requested: look for the main ideas and concepts in the texts, consider
their strengths and weaknesses, think about questions for discussion, etc.

Reflection paper on your observation of the March for Science
On 22 April 2017 March for Science takes place in more than 360 cities around the world to support
research and evidence-based policies, which is seen as an urgent necessity in the context of recent
policy changes. In the course on 27.4., we will discuss this event in the context of long-standing
debate on relationship between science and politics.
On 22.4 you have to observe the March for Science either in Vienna or in other city where it takes
place. You are free to choose an observation method (participatory or non-participatory, interviews
etc) that you consider to be the most appropriate. If it is not possible for you to attend the March for
Science, do a virtual observation of the March for Science on social media (Facebook, Twitter, etc)
and consider other methods you can use (e.g. social media analytics). If on 22 April you are in some
part of Europe where the March for Science is not taking place, you can also reflect on its absence.

2

Until 25.4 18:00 you have to submit 1-2 page reflection paper in which you describe which methods
and why you choose for your observations, what insights you obtained, and your reflection on the
March for Science. Also include 1-2 questions for class discussion, which we will address on 27.4.

Research paper
Research paper can be written individually or in small teams of 2 to 3 people. A lot of feedback and
support is provided for the preparation of excellent essays. There are 3 steps in preparing your essay:

STEP 1: Choosing the topic and deciding on individual or small group essay until 30 March 2017.
You are free to choose topic of your research paper within the thematic scope of this course. Possible
topics (to be narrowed down for specific research papers) include (but are not limited to):
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Discourses and policies for knowledge-based society at European and national level
Controversies and divisions surrounding development of knowledge-based society
Comparing knowledge-based society in Europe with the US/Asia
Europeanization and globalization of science, technology and innovation policies
Talent mobility in Europe
Knowledge networks in and beyond Europe
Gender equality in knowledge-based society
The role of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research
Political, social and economic roles of universities in a knowledge-based society
Protest movements and interests groups in knowledge-based society
Regulation of emerging sciences and technologies (e.g. GMOs, nanotechnology)

STEP 2: Discussion and presentation of paper proposals (2-3 pages) in small groups May 4-June 1,
2017. One the week of presentation, paper proposals have to be uploaded on Moodle until Tuesday
18:00. Paper proposals should indicate research question/s, theoretical and methodological
approach, envisaged structure, first empirical results, tentative conclusions and the main literature
and data sources. Constructive comments, questions, suggestions and feedback should help for essay
preparation.

STEP 3: Submission of the research paper via Moodle until July 10, 2017. Individual papers should be
10 pages and team papers 15 pages including reference list, 12p Times New Roman, 1.5 line spacing.
All sources of information should be clearly identified. It is suggested that Harvard style of
referencing is used.

3

Where to find information for research essays: Some suggestions
Books
Chou, M-H. and Gornitzka, A. (eds) (2014) Building the Knowledge Economy in Europe: New
Constellations in Research and Higher Education Governance, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Delanghe, H., Muldur, U. and Soete, L. (eds) (2009) European Science and Technology Policy: Towards
Integration or Fragmentation? Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Wedlin, L. and Nedeva, M. (eds) (2015) Towards European Science: Dynamics and Policy of an
Evolving European Research Space, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Academic journals
Research Policy
Science and Public Policy
Review of Policy Research
Minerva
European Journal of Education
Technological Forecasting and Social Change

News on research governance
Science
Nature
Times Higher Education
University World News
ERA Portal Austria
Institutions
Research & Innovation (European Commission)
Innovation Union (European Commission initiative)
Horizon 2020 (EU research and innovation funding program 2014-2020)
Research and Innovation Observatory (Information on national research and innovation policies)
The Innovation Policy Platform (OECD)
OECD Directorate for Science, Technology and Innovation
Eurostat
Eurobarometer
Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economy bmwfw
4

Course plan
PART I Introduction to the policies and politics for a knowledge-based society
1. 9.3.2017. Introduction to the course and the topic
OECD (2016) 10 key technology trends for the future. OECD Science, Technology and Innovation
Outlook 2016.

2. 16.3.2017. The role of the state revisited
Mazzucato, M. (2014) The Entrepreneurial State. Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths. London:
Anthem Press, pp.1-13; 87-112.

3. 23.3.2017. Politics of Innovation [REFLECTION PAPER 1]
Taylor, M.Z. (2016) The Politics of Innovation. Why Some Countries Are Better Than Others at Science
& Technology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.3-39.

4. 30.3.2017. Research and innovation policies in the European Union/ Paper topics chosen
Veugelers, R. (2014) Undercutting the Future? European Research Spending in Times of Fiscal
Consolidation. Bruegel Policy Contribution, Issue 2014/06.
Ulnicane, I. (2015) Broadening aims and building support in science, technology and innovation policy:
The case of the European Research Area. Journal of Contemporary European Research 11 (1): 31-49.

PART II Science and policy in turbulent times

5. 6.4.2017. Science for Policy [REFLECTION PAPER 2]
Pielke, R. (2007) The Honest Broker. Making Sense of Science in Policy and Politics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp.1-38.

! 22.4.2017. Observation of the March for Science (replacing class of 8 June 2017)

6. 27.4.2017. Discussion of the March for Science [REFLECTION PAPER 3]
Young, E. (2017) What Exactly Are People Marching For When They March for Science? Atlantic 7
March 2017.
March for Science official website www.marchforscience.com
5

PART III Small group discussions and presentations of paper proposals
7. 4.5.2017. Small group discussion and presentation of paper proposals I
Innovation awareness in military environment
Science and technology development in Japan
Europeanization and globalization of science, technology and innovation policies
Still a ‘western’ world when it comes to science, technology and innovation?
8. 11.5.2017. Small group discussion and presentation of paper proposals II
Is the free movement of labour integral to or an obstacle for the European innovation project?
Predicted effects of Brexit on R&D and higher education
Comparing knowledge-based society in the USA and Asia
Comparison of a knowledge-based society in the EU with the US
9. 18.5.2017. Small group discussion and presentation of paper proposals III
Women’s role in science, technology and innovation
How does climate change affects EU’s policy in the fields of environmental STI
The role of expertise in urbanism
What are the roles of universities in a knowledge-based society?
10. 1.6.2017. Small group discussion and presentation of paper proposals IV
Regulation of emerging science and technologies
Regulation of emerging surveillance technologies in the EU
Internet of Things
Development of Open Policies in Europe
11. 8.6.2017. Replaced by observation of the March for Science on 22.4.2017.

PART IV Universities in knowledge-based society
12. 22.6.2017. Talent mobility: from ‘brain drain’ to ‘brain circulation’
Saxenian, A. (2006) The New Argonauts. Regional Advantage in a Global Economy. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press; Introduction & Chapter 8: 1-11; 325-338.
Mitchell, K. (2015) Rethinking the ‘Erasmus Effect’ on European Identity. JCMS Journal of Common
Market Studies 53(2): 330-348.

13. 29.6.2017. What is social and economic ‘impact’ of universities and how to measure it?
Bastow, S., Dunleavy, P. and Tinkler J. (2014) The Impact of the Social Sciences. How Academics and
Their Research Make a Difference. London: SAGE. Chapter 2 ‘Social scientists’ pathways to impacts’,
35-64.
6

PART V (OPTIONAL but highly recommended) Vienna Lectures on the European Union (organized
by the EIF Institute for European Integration Research, University of Vienna)
12.6.2017. 17:00 Aula, Campus of the University of Vienna, Vienna Lecture on the European Union
‘The Court of Justice of the European Union and the EU’s Policy Process’, Professor Susanne
K.Schmidt, University of Bremen.

7

