Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Responsible Technology
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/journal-of-responsible-technology

Developing capabilities for responsible research and innovation (RRI)
George Ogoh a, *, Simisola Akintoye e, f, Damian Eke f, Michele Farisco b, c, Josepine Fernow b,
Karin Grasenick f, Manuel Guerrero b, d, Achim Rosemann f, Arleen Salles b, Inga Ulnicane f
a

School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Centre for Research Ethics & Bioethics (CRB), Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
c
Biogem, Biology and Molecular Genetics Research Institute, Ariano Irpino, (AV), Italy
d
Department of Bioethics and Medical Humanities, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile
e
Centre for Law, Faculty of Business and Law, Justice and Society, De Montfort Law School, De Montfort University, Leicester, UK
f
Centre for Computing and Social Responsibility, Faculty of Computing, School of Computer Science and Informatics, Engineering and Media, De Montfort University,
Leicester, UK
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Research and innovation
RRI
Ethics
Capacity building
Capability development

This paper examines the notion of capability development through the lens of Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI). It describes how RRI capabilities can be promoted and developed through capacity-building activities by drawing on a reflection of the experiences of some members of the Ethics and Society team of the EUfunded Human Brain Project (HBP) who have contributed to the development of an extensive RRI capacity
building programme for HBP researchers, EBRAINS research infrastructure developers and users, as well as
interested external audiences. It also highlights some of the outcomes of the RRI capacity-building exercise and
the challenge of assessing the impact of such activities.

Introduction
The implementation of the Responsible Research and Innovation
(RRI) approach requires researchers and other stakeholders to have an
understanding of the concept and practice of RRI itself, an adequate
knowledge of its dimensions/components, and the capability to undertake the activities required to successfully implement it. Much work on
RRI has therefore expended on developing RRI teaching and training
activities, with the aim of developing key RRI capabilities. In this paper,
we define the term “RRI capabilities” as the acquisition and internalization of the skills, knowledge, know-how and attitudes to apply core
dimensions and principles of RRI in the context of the planning, development, management and everyday operation of research and innovation activities and projects. Still, numerous questions around how
specific RRI capabilities can be developed, and which capabilities are
required to successfully implement RRI at a project level remain.
Open issues also include the identification of the relevant criteria to
develop RRI capabilities and the level of competence required (in terms
of skill set) by possible stakeholders, how these stakeholders are identified, what the consequences of these interventions are in practice, and
how to assess/quantify them.

A particular challenge arises when looking at these questions on a
project level. Most RRI training activities are aimed at improving capabilities on the level of the research system, for example, by targeting
early career researchers, typically in a particular discipline or funding
environment such as the CDTs (Centre for Doctoral Training) in the UK
funded by the EPSRC i.e. the Engineering and Physical Science Research
Council (Stahl et al 2023; Ten Holter, Stahl and Jirotka, 2022). This is
understandable where specific RRI-related needs are identified on a
topic or discipline level and the aim is to promote a general culture
change towards RRI in this field. The issue is more difficult on the
project level when broader questions are considered, for example, on the
RRI capabilities required beyond the immediate project. Thus, this paper
asks: How can the required capabilities to achieve the implementation of
specific RRI dimensions be identified and developed? And how can the
impact of RRI capability development activities be assessed?
This question is addressed at the level of a discrete research and
innovation project by drawing on a reflection of RRI capacity-building
processes in the Human Brain Project (HBP). This is a huge, international, and interdisciplinary project working across neuroscience and
information and communications technology (ICT). The HBP is an
interesting case because RRI capacity building has been an important

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: george.ogoh@nottingham.ac.uk (G. Ogoh).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrt.2023.100065
Available online 12 August 2023
2666-6596/© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd on
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

behalf

of

ORBIT.

This

is

an

open

access

article

under

the

CC

BY-NC-ND

license

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

part of a broader range of RRI activities developed throughout the 10
years of the project (2013-2023). It is expected that these activities will
have an impact on the main planned HBP legacy initiative - the digital
brain research infrastructure called EBRAINS (Stahl et al 2021). By
reflecting on some experiences of the Ethics and Society Team - a
multidisciplinary group of ethicists, social scientists, and philosophers
within the HBP - the paper explores insights from the broad range of
interactions, research, practices, and efforts culminating in an extensive
RRI capacity building exercise for EBRAINS.

to a fast-changing world. In the context of this paper, instinct refers to
the complex interaction of intrinsic and experiential factors that promotes learning. This considers the mindsets, motivations and hopes of
individuals which are crucial to the development of capacities.
Also in this context, while the organisation mainly refers to the HBP
and EBRAINS, the community referred to here is the community of HBP
researchers and the users, developers, and management of the innovative EBRAINS Research Infrastructure for brain research that has resulted from the activities of the HBP. The idea of a community also takes
into consideration the structures, configuration and patterns of different
groups within the HBP and their interactions. This is especially important as the HBP is a large-scale research initiative involving more than
500 researchers, scientists and engineers in over 150 different organisations (including universities, teaching hospitals and research centres)
spread across 20 countries around Europe.
Considering this context, some indications of the challenges of the
capacity-building effort aimed at the development of an RRI-inspired
culture and practice within the HBP and the community around
EBRAINS digital brain research infrastructure can be seen. The challenges include those brought about by the sheer size of the HBP, the
distributed nature of its partnering institution and organisations spread
all over Europe, as well as constraints related to project funding and the
temporary nature of the project. Challenges like these along with those
discussed in the next section are limiting factors that were taken into
consideration during the development of the capacity-building
programme.
A link between the concepts of capacity development and dynamic
capability can be seen here, as both concepts relate to the ability to
acquire competencies that are required for survival in a fast-changing
world. Nevertheless, these concepts can be differentiated because
while "capacity development" refers to processes of developing necessary skills and abilities, "dynamic capabilities" refer to the adapting
application of those skills. Also, the reference in both definitions to a
‘fast-changing world’ is certainly apt for the context of the HBP
considering the complex nature of neuroscience research that it is
involved in and the pace of development of such research. Neuroscience
is a fast-paced complex multidisciplinary field that has advanced rapidly
over the last 50 years and is predicted to accelerate even further over the
next 50 years (Altimus et al., 2019) as it combines disciplines such as
computer science, ICT, chemistry, medicine, mathematics etc. The
complex nature of the HBP can be seen in the fact that it combines
empirical neuroscience in both human and animals brain with theory
and modelling with the development of an advanced research infrastructure (i.e. EBRAINS) for brain research comprising supercomputing,
big data analytics artificial intelligence and simulation (Amunts, et. al.,
2019).
Building on these ideas, some indication of what such learning may
include can be seen in Owen, von Schomberg and Macnaghten (2021)
who have argued that it is important to integrate and embed capacities
for anticipation, inclusive deliberation, and stakeholder engagement.
This is especially important as the complex nature of innovation means
that there is a potential to generate ethical, social and environmental
challenges in uncertain and unpredictable ways. A clear understanding
of such dimensions of responsible research and innovation (RRI) is
crucial for a complex multidisciplinary project like the HBP which embraces neuroscience, ICT, and brain-inspired technologies and where
there are different understandings about what responsible research entails and how it translates into practice. However, as Steen, Nauta,
Gaasterland and Ogier (2018) point out, while it is relatively easy to
conduct a single RRI activity, it is much more difficult to institutionalise
RRI or embed it in an organisation’s structure or culture. Thus, the need
to understand good ways of developing RRI capabilities and the challenges involved.

Capabilities and their development in RRI
In the management sciences, the notion of capabilities has been used
for many years to refer to the ability to achieve certain goals. For
example, Andrews, Christensen, Guth and Learned (1969) described
capabilities as the potential ability of an individual or organisation to
accomplish whatever they have set out to do. On the other hand, capacity is described as the sum of the capabilities of a group or organisation. Both terms are often linked to the ability to learn and adapt to the
performance of an organisation and highlight the creation or development of competencies that are truly distinctive and essential for the
improved performance of an organisation.
With constantly changing world environments bringing new challenges, the need to dynamically build capabilities that enable individuals and organisation to thrive have also been recognised. Such an
ability to respond quickly to rapidly changing environments has been
described as a dynamic capability. The concept of dynamic capability
was developed by Teece et al. (1997) who created a framework for
businesses to achieve and sustain competitive advantage in a
fast-changing world. They defined dynamic capability as “the ability to
integrate, build and reconfigure internal and external competencies to
address rapidly changing environments.” Dynamic Capability involves a
continuous effort to adapt and improve processes and encompasses the
ability to learn, innovate, and restructure resources in response to new
opportunities and challenges (Teece, 2007). Importantly, Otto and Zeigler (2006) have pointed out that such capabilities may be derived
mainly through training, learning, and education and the broadening of
human capabilities can play a role in influencing individual and societal
values.
Interestingly, in the early days of the development of RRI, Owen
et al. (2013) recognised the need for dynamic capability when applying
the RRI approach. They described responsiveness, a key dimension of
RRI as an iterative, inclusive and open process of adaptive learning with
dynamic capability. Among other things, they suggested that organisations have to be responsive to survive in a quickly changing world,
which requires both dynamic capability and adaptive learning. Adaptive
learning refers to the continuous learning and adoption of strategies and
actions that facilitate critical reflection and inform decisions that optimise the effectiveness of program implementation in unexpected and
changing circumstances (Joey et al., 2021). Thus, it appears that there is
a common understanding both within the management and RRI fields
that the prerequisite of dynamic capability is continuous learning, or
training and education - concepts which call to mind the idea of capacity
building or capacity development.
The terms capacity building and capacity development are used
interchangeably in this paper to refer to “a process of developing and
strengthening the skills, instincts, abilities, processes and resources that
organisations and communities need to survive, adapt, and thrive in a
fast-changing world” (UN Habitat, 2019). This definition is important
because it describes capacity building using concepts that are familiar,
easy to relate to, and at the core of the RRI training programme
described in this paper. For example, it indicates that capacity building
is ‘a process’, indicating a series of related and progressive activities.
Among other things, the definition also gives some indication of the
purpose, suggesting that this is to develop skills, instincts, and abilities
that organisations and communities need in order to survive and adapt
2

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

In 2021, the Edinburgh Hub for Responsible Research and Innovation1 collaborated with the European Research Area Cofund on BioTechnologies i.e., ERA CoBioTech Funding Programme to understand
the capabilities necessary to pursue RRI and how they intersect with the
professional capabilities of individuals (Smith, Bernstein, O’Donovan, &
Cuttica, 2022). Among other things, it has shown how the integration of
skills, knowledge and the right institutional conditions can contribute to
the building of RRI capabilities. And although the context of the application was focused on funding cultures and funders, a good portion of
the messaging resonates quite well with the context of this article as they
have described capabilities as “the real ability to do or be what a person
values in their professional roles or to achieve goals that they think are
important to pursue RRI”. They agree with O’Donovan, Michalec and
Moon (2022) that expertise is an instance of capabilities, and that
research capacity aggregates the capabilities and resources to perform
research. They maintain that although capabilities do not emerge uniformly, they depend on people’s situations and values, and it is important to focus on identifying the goals along with valued capabilities for
RRI and then develop conditions that enable the capabilities to emerge
and thrive. Such goals and the necessary interventions to support RRI
must be co-created with a diversity of stakeholders, using approaches
that create shared spaces for reflection and action.
To understand how other funded RRI-related projects involved in the
development of RRI training have determined the necessary capabilities
for which they have created capacity-building resources, several projects were examined. For example, EnRRICH2 (Enhancing Responsible
Research and Innovation through Curricular in Higher Education) is a
project that was aimed at embedding RRI in Higher Education. A key
objective of the project was to "improve the capacity of students and staff
in higher education to develop knowledge, skills and attitudes to support
the embedding of RRI in curricula” (Hally, O’Mahony and Burns, 2018).
The project therefore focused on enabling students to acquire the broad
range of skills, knowledge, and experience required for flourishing of the
knowledge economy and knowledge society. It has been suggested that
this happened by initiating discussions and debates both within and
beyond the project consortium and at institutional, national and international levels. An important starting point for the EnRRICH project was
the understanding that responsibility refers to the capability to use past
and present knowledge in order to understand, and at best to predict, the
impact of one’s endeavours (Tassone and Eppink, 2016). Among other
things, the project developed a 15-credit module for teaching
community-based participatory research to PhD students and a tool to
help educators (re)design curricula for RRI. This tool was based on the
outcome of a scoping exercise involving the examination of curricula in
partner institutions to identify promising RRI practices.
Another project that has embarked on the development of RRI capacities is EMBRACE3 (Embedding RRI in Future and Emerging Technologies). The project draws on RRI-related activities of the HBP to
provide training and consultancy services aimed at increasing the skills
of scientific and technical researchers to identify and address social and
ethical concerns associated with the activities of FET (Future and
Emerging Technology) projects. This is considering that although FET
research and innovation activities create radically novel technologies,
they are also capable of raising social and ethical concerns. Thus, the
project developed 4 training modules covering data governance, stakeholder engagement, design of ethical AI systems and researcher integrity. According to Keene (2022) the RRI capabilities of the FET
researchers were determined from the outcome of interviews with 40
FET launchpad coordinators. The focus of the interviews was to understand the needs of the researchers in terms of RRI-related knowledge and
services and how to satisfy these needs through the provision of relevant

training and consultancy services.
Unlike EMBRACE, the HEIRRI4project (Higher Education Institutions and Responsible Research and Innovation) project developed
10 training RRI training programmes for different education levels at
higher education institutions. Also, for them, the development of these
modules was influenced by findings from a state-of-the-art review and
database of good practices, cases, and teaching materials that the project
developed (Tokalić et al., 2021). They found that although there were
numerous educational resources that encompass RRI to some extent,
higher education still struggles with structural changes needed for the
optimal implementation of RRI education. The training programmes
which are based on the Problem-Based Learning (PBL) methodology
include a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) and a summer school.
They were designed as modules that can be incorporated into a wide
range of existing undergraduate subjects such as Bioethics or Science
Communication. The PBL approach adopted enabled reflection and
dialogue and is supported by videos, scenarios and card games.
However, other providers of RRI training resources are not very clear
about how they have determined RRI capabilities which they have targeted with the training materials they have developed. For example,
projects like FIT4RRI5 (Fostering Improved Training Tools for Responsible Research and Innovation) have developed 6 online training courses
on RRI and open science topics. The online courses include an introduction to RRI; engaging the public in RRI; RRI for companies; openness
in Science and RRI; research and data ethics; and open and fair data.
Although it is hard to find the rationale for the choices made, they have
maintained that the “content collection was developed in close dialogue
with the RRI community, in contact with several projects” (Principe,
2020). Building on these resources, a follow-on project called FOSTER
Plus6 (Fostering the practical implication of Open Science in Horizon
2020 and beyond) has developed capacity-building resources to promote Open Science - one of the RRI dimensions - to academic staff,
young scientists and policymakers.
ORBIT-RRI7 (Observatory for Responsible Research and Innovation
in ICT) is another project that has embarked on RRI training, capacity
building and consultancy services. The project builds on the outcomes of
a previous RRI Project (i.e., RESPONSIBLE INDUSTRY8 – Responsible
Research and Innovation in Business and Industry in the Domain of ICT
for Health, Demographic Change and Well-being; and FRICT - Framework for Responsible Research and Innovation in ICT). It is worth noting
that FRICT developed an Ethics Observatory that gathered ethical
challenges faced by contemporary ICT research and a collection of best
practices to promote recommendations and engagement with the ICT
community. ORBIT-RRI (or simply ORBIT) was borne out of the need to
ensure sustainability at the end of these projects and became a nonprofit legal entity. Based on the outcomes of the predecessor projects,
ORBIT started off providing Foundation and Practitioner Courses on RRI
for CDTs often funded by the EPSRC. It should be noted that the EPSRC
have invested quite heavily in programmes aimed at further institutionalising RRI by funding RRI training programmes in CDTs all over the
UK (Owen, von Schomberg and Macnaghten, 2021; Stahl et al 2023).
The ORBIT project was funded through one of such EPSRC funding calls
and has since expanded to providing RRI-related consultancy and
training on other RRI-related topics most notably providing a home for
RRI training courses that resulted from the EMBRACE project. presents a
summary of the targeted RRI training programmes described in this
section (Table 1).
This overview offers some indications of how other funded projects
have attempted to build capabilities around RRI by developing relevant

4

https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/666004
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/741477
6
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/741839
7
https://www.orbit-rri.org/
8
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/609817
5

1

https://rri.ed.ac.uk/capabilities-responsible-innovation/
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/665759
3
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101034471
2

3

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

inspired culture and practice) in organisations (Stahl et al., 2021), the
ethics and society team of HBP started a targeted programme of
capacity-building on RRI for the HBP and EBRAINS – the brain research
infrastructure developed by the project starting from April 2020.
Through a comprehensive set of capacity-building activities, the programme has aimed to enable the institutionalisation of responsible
innovation practices in the HBP and EBRAINS. The capacity building
programme also sought to facilitate the development of capacities for
anticipating, identifying, and proactively addressing the ethical, legal,
and societal issues raised by research in the project, including issues
related to diversity dimensions.
The RRI capacity building programme, which builds on the legacy of
the Ethics and Society work carried out since the inception of the HBP in
2013 (Aicardi et al 2020; Stahl et al 2019; 2021; Ulnicane et al 2022),
also promoted proactive approaches for addressing relevant legal,
ethical and social issues within the project. It provided different tools
and methods for foresight, sociological, regulatory, critical and philosophical reflection, as well as public engagement and science communication. A range of activities, including workshops, training sessions
and discussion groups, was developed to increase the knowledge,
experience and skills required to work with the RRI approach. The target
audience includes HBP researchers, EBRAINS users, data and infrastructure providers, as well as EBRAINS leadership and management,
and interested external audiences. At the end of the training programme,
the targeted audience was expected to develop the ability to:

Table 1
Summary of capabilities targeted by funded RRI Training programmes and
outcomes.
Project

How have targeted
capabilities been
identified?

Target group

Outcomes

EnRRICH

Initiating discussions
and debates both
within and beyond
the project
consortium and at
institutional, national
and international
levels;
Scoping exercise
involving the
examination of
curricula in partner
institutions to
identify promising
RRI practices.
Interviews with 40
FET (Future and
Emerging
Technology)
launchpad
coordinators.

Students and staff
in higher
education.

1 module (15-credit)
for teaching
community-based
participatory
research to PhD
students and a tool to
help educators re
(design) curricula for
RRI.

Scientific and
technical
researchers in
FET projects.

Findings from a stateof-the-art review and
database of good
practices, cases, and
teaching materials
that the project
developed.
Content collection
was developed in
close dialogue with
the RRI community,
in contact with
several projects.

Different
education levels
at higher
education
institutions

4 training modules
covering data
governance,
stakeholder
engagement, design
of ethical AI systems
and researcher
integrity.
10 training RRI
training programmes.

EMBRACE

HEIRRI

FIT4RR

ORBITRRI

ORBIT was a direct
response to EPSRC
funding calls for CDT
training on RRI and
built on the outcomes
of 2 previous projects

RRI trainers (as
they conducted
several ‘train the
trainers’
workshops)

PhD candidates
based in UK CDTs
(Centres for
Doctoral
Training).

• Identify, understand, and address the ethical, legal, and societal issues related to the HBP and EBRAINS.
• Identify and involve relevant (internal and external) experts, stakeholders and members of the lay public in processes to anticipate and
deliberate on content and solutions to such issues.
• Communicate about the research and activities of the HBP and
EBRAINS.
• Contribute to maximization of the positive societal impact of
research and activities of the HBP and EBRAINS.
• Contribute to the reduction of existing gaps between scientific
research and its public exploitation.

6 online training
courses on RRI and
open science topics.
The online courses
include an
introduction to RRI;
engaging the public in
RRI; RRI for
companies; openness
in science and RRI;
research and data
ethics; and open and
fair data.
1 foundation RRI and
1 practitioner Course
on RRI.

The planning and development of the RRI Capacity building programme started in April 2020 at the beginning of the third Specific Grant
Agreement (SGA3) of the HBP, and the first modules were formally
rolled out a year later in April 2021. It was understood that for the
programme to be successful, a good grasp of the required capabilities
and suitable methods for delivering the necessary training was necessary, especially as this was being planned at the height of the COVID-19
pandemic.
In determining the RRI capabilities that needed to be developed, a
key consideration was the lessons learned from previous work carried
out by the HBP Ethics and Society team. The group produced several
scientific publications and three Opinions on RRI-related topics of high
relevance to the HBP specifically the Opinion and Action Plan on Data
Protection and Privacy (Salles et al., 2021), Opinion on ‘Responsible
Dual Use’ - Political, Security, Intelligence and Military Research of
Concern in Neuroscience and Neurotechnology (Aicardi et al., 2018) and
Opinion on Trust and Transparency in Artificial Intelligence). The
Opinion on Data Protection and Privacy recognises that HBP’s goal is to
attain a fuller understanding of the human brain for better diagnosis and
treatment of brain disorders and the development of new brain-like
technologies. However, in order to do this, the project must go beyond
existing legal compliance with applicable laws to ethical considerations
involved in the collection, storage, and analyses of large amounts of data
having different levels of confidentiality. Considering the potential to
raise ethical, legal, and societal issues, data protection, data management, and data governance became key topics requiring skill to identify
and address relevant concerns. Three capacity development modules
were developed based on these themes, designed specifically for

capacities. While most have targeted students at higher education institutions (e.g., PhD candidates), at least one of the projects targeted
researchers involved in a wide range of projects. It appears that for most
of these projects, the preferred approach was to engage with relevant
stakeholders through some form of dialogic process. In fact, Smith,
Bernstein, O’Donovan, & Cuttica, 2022 suggest that this is the right
thing to do as they have pointed out that the capabilities for achieving
important RRI goals must be co-created with the diversity of those who
are affected by particular RRI interventions. The outcomes were often
discussed in terms of the types and numbers of training materials
developed and while the outcomes varied from 1 to 10 modules/courses,
they cover a wide range of topics. Also, while some were quite specific in
terms of targeted RRI topic areas, others were more generic in coverage.
An RRI capacity building programme for HBP and EBRAINS
Recognising that an effective RRI capacity-building programme can
enable the institutionalisation of RRI (i.e., the development of RRI4

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

EBRAINS users, giving, (1) an introduction to data governance in
EBRAINS, (2) training on data protection in EBRAINS and (3) training on
the ethics compliance requirements for EBRAINS data.
Similarly, in the Dual Use Opinion, Aicardi et al. (2018) suggest that
applying RRI to the concept of ‘dual use’ can enable an increased ability
to identify research programmes and projects as well as innovation and
development that can be classed as ‘dual use research of concern’. The
authors also highlight that rather than eliminate debates about types of
research, RRI seeks to build the capacity to reflect on such issues and
engage stakeholders in the decision process. One of the recommendations in this Opinion suggests developing ongoing training activities on
dual use of concern. To this end, dual use was considered an important
theme for inclusion in the capacity-building programme and a module
was designed and developed in this area.
Other themes that were considered relevant for RRI capacity building were selected from the RRI approaches adopted within the HBP –
chiefly the AREA (Anticipate, Reflect, Engage, and Act) framework and
the EU RRI keys namely i.e. public engagement, open access, gender,
ethics, science education, and governance. These have been well
explained in Stahl et al. (2021). Regardless, it should be noted that the
AREA framework stresses that anticipation, reflection, and engagement
with diverse publics are prerequisites for the societal desirability and
acceptability of outcomes and process of research and innovation. Thus,
themes around ‘foresight and anticipation of social and ethical issues,’
and stakeholder/public engagement were considered important additions to the capacity-building programme. Later, science communication was also added to support the researcher’s outreach and
engagement.
Additionally, the HBP has developed two gender action plans (GAP)
based on research from Change and Complexity Management as well as
Diversity and Gender Studies and Sociology to acknowledge the
complexity of the project. Both set a strong emphasis on capacity
building via training, coaching, and guidelines offering reflective
questions (for example, the Equality, Diversity and Inclusion toolkit9).
Measures are structurally anchored and supported by the project
members, contributing thus to the integration of diversity dimensions in
HBP research and innovation.
Another important consideration has been that EBRAINS is a digital
research infrastructure designed to target specific societal challenges in
the areas of health and well-being with a focus on brain-related research
and neurotechnologies. Consequently, themes around neuroethics were
also deemed to be crucial for the RRI capacity-building programme. And
in keeping with the RRI vision for inclusive research and innovation
processes and practices, diversity-related themes were also represented
in the RRI capacity building programme.
It should be pointed out that many of these themes also build on the
dialogic approach to RRI that has influenced much of the RRI-related
work in the HBP (Stahl et al., 2019). It recognises that dialogue
cannot happen in a vacuum and, therefore, promotes ethical discourses
that have openness, inclusive deliberation, and responsiveness at the
heart. This has led to the development of structures within the HBP that
enable discourse ethics such as Working Groups, Embedded Ethics
Tasks, and Committees.
Such structures have also influenced the development of some of the
themes of the RRI capacity building programme. For example, themes
on researcher awareness and research integrity built on ongoing work on
the HBP’s Ethics Rapporteurs Programme, a project-wide participatory
internal structure to flag and address ethical concerns. Other HPB groups
that also had an influence on the RRI Capacity Development Programme
include the Data Governance Working Group (DGWG), Dual Use
Working Group (DUWG), Diversity and Equal Opportunities Committee
9

(DEOC), and the Ethics Advisory Board (EAB), an independent body that
advises the Project’s Science and Infrastructure Board10 (SIB) and the
HBP Directorate11 (DIR) on specific ethical, regulatory, social and
philosophical issues raised by research that is being undertaken or
planned under the umbrella of the HBP. Other experiences that had a
bearing on the RRI Capacity Building programme include collaborative
workshops with neuroscientists (Aicardi et al., 2020), the work of
embedded neuroethics and ethics tasks in diverse scientific work packages (the virtual brain, consciousness, brain-inspired AI) and the experiences of the Ethics and Society team in educational events where
opportunities were available to experiment with different methods and
formats. An example is the HBP Education Programme where
RRI-related training regularly features in annual HBP Student
Conferences.
This has now resulted in the development of the 17 modules detailed
in Table 2. Most of these modules aim to provide a set of general RRI
capabilities that can also be used in the context of other research projects
than the HBP and other research areas. They include capabilities to
conduct public engagement, implement foresight and anticipation,
reflect on the ethical dimensions of knowledge transfer and commercialization, identifying issues related to the dual use and misuse of
research and inventions, awareness of diversity and inclusion, recognise
and address challenges to research integrity, as well as the use of key
principles in science communication. Other modules sought to facilitate
RRI capabilities limited to the use of specific types of projects and/or
research fields, such as the capability to apply concepts and approaches
in neuroethics (in neuroscience projects), apply principles from neuroethics to AI, managing the ethical dimensions related to the use of
human biological or medical data, as well as animal data. Still other
modules aimed to facilitate capabilities related to the specific characteristics of EBRAINS, such as the use of an RRI lens to reflect on the
ethical and societal issues in EBRAINS. The capabilities that these
modules seek to transmit constitute a more general set of skills and
competencies that researchers can adopt and operationalize in the specific projects or sub-projects they conduct and lead. In this sense, the
training serves mainly as an entry point to develop more specific and indepth forms of RRI that are specifically tailored to the needs of individual research projects, its different purposes, stages, or application
domains. In other words, while the training aimed to teach a set of
overall RRI capabilities, and facilitate their practical use, it did not
support the implementation of these skills and techniques at the level of
individual projects, or the ways in which these projects are designed or
organised. One reason for this rather broad and general approach was
that the HBP itself is a large-scale research project, that comprises
several 100 research projects and sub-projects, that explore widely
divergent areas of the neurosciences, computer sciences, data management, AI, and other areas.
Note, however, that after the formal delivery of training began, three
modules (all data governance-related modules) were revamped and
remodelled to make them more useful to the target audience. The
modules were previously referred to as: “Introduction to EBRAINS Data
Governance”; “Ethics Compliance for EBRAINS Data”; and “Data Protection in EBRAINS”. As the modules were all data governance related,
the training for these modules was often delivered together in a single
event rather than at individual events for each module. Although the
modules received very positive feedback from participants, the module
leaders reflected on the delivery of these modules, discussed their ideas
for improving them with the capacity-building team and other stakeholders and the decision was reached to restructure them. Also, as
indicated previously, the Science Communication module was added

10
https://www.humanbrainproject.eu/about-hbp/project-structure/go
vernance/science-and-infrastructure-board/
11
https://www.humanbrainproject.eu/about-hbp/project-structure/gover
nance/directorate/

https://www.edi-toolkit.org/

5

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

Table 2
Description of Modules of the RRI capacity building programme of the HBP and
EBRAINS.
Module

Description

Animal Data in EBRAINS Governance and Compliance

This module addresses the legal, ethical,
and societal pressures that underpin the
establishment of requirements for animal
research to ensure that participants have a
good handle on not only what is expected of
them as researchers, but also on why these
expectations have come about. By the end of
the module, participants will have the tools
they need to ensure that they handle their
animal research, and the data it produces, in
a responsible, legal and ethical manner.
The module introduces a number of ethical,
compliance and data protection issues
related to human data processing in
neuroscience research, particularly issues
raised by data processing activities in
EBRAINS (such as informed consent,
pseudonymisation, data controllership and
data security). Participants will learn how
to address these issues in ways that are
socially acceptable, ethically responsible
and legally compliant.
In this workshop, we use the lens of
Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI)
to facilitate reflection on societal and
ethical aspects of the EBRAINS research
infrastructure. The workshop provides:
• An overview of the RRI approach by
highlighting its History, Definitions and
the HBP RRI Approach.
• A space for deliberation and critical
reflection of work being undertaken in
EBRAINS through the use of case studies.
• tools and resources for responsible
innovation in EBRAINS
The module takes the format of a hands-on
workshop and introduces the theory and
practice of public engagement and citizen
participation. It shows the aims and
outcomes one can achieve with the different
public engagement methods. Participants
are trained in how to choose engagement
methods that fit the desired outcome and
will learn how to engage different types of
stakeholders, from experts to lay people.
The module consists of a mixture of lectures
and practical exercises. Participants are first
introduced to foresight theory in RRI as well
as neuroethical and societal issues. They are
thereafter presented with cases and
examples of possible long-term societal and
ethical implications of brain research and
an overview of approaches to anticipate
these issues and implications.
This module takes the form of an interactive
workshop that explores the ethical and RRI
dimensions of knowledge transfer,
collaborations with industry partners, and
the commercialization of research findings.
It will introduce criteria and assessment
procedures for identifying key ethical and
social issues related to the exploitation,
commercialisation and international
transfer of research findings and
innovations from HBP and EBRAINS.
This workshop will introduce a novel
approach to dual use of concern developed
by the Ethics and Society team in the
Human Brain Project. This approach goes
beyond the traditional civil-military
dichotomy understanding of dual use and
considers broader societally beneficial and
harmful uses including political, security,

Human Data in EBRAINS Governance and Compliance

Introduction to RRI in EBRAINS

Introduction to Public Engagement

Foresight and anticipation of social
and ethical issues

Ethics and RRI Dimensions of
Knowledge Transfer &
Commercialization

Understanding dual use of concern &
misuse in the infrastructure

Table 2 (continued )
Module

Diversity and inclusion

Diversity in research

Researcher Awareness and Research
Integrity

Introduction to Neuroethics in HBP
and EBRAINS. Pilot course

Neuroethical reflection on
consciousness and cognition

Neuroethical reflection on the virtual
brain: model’s reliability and
validity

Description
intelligence and military uses of concern.
Participants will gain an understanding of
dual use of concern and misuse in brain
research (including AI, robotics and
computing), and learn about the ways to
identify and address potential concerns and
misuse issues.
In this module, you will learn how to
contribute to an inclusive working
environment and get insights into different
aspects related to interaction, collaboration,
and leadership.
You will also:
• Understand individual diversity traits,
the impact on how we perceive others
and are perceived by others
• Learn about different working styles,
values and norms and their impact on
(virtual) collaboration
Get to know, recognise and solve
conflicts that arise from diversity,
addressing discriminatory
communication and actions
This module explores the incorporation of
diversity in research design and practices,
and in interdisciplinary research. In this
module, participants will
• Understand definitions of gender,
diversity, and intersectionality and how
to operationalise them in specific fields of
science;
• Learn about the impact of biases on
scientific priorities and findings;
• Apply lessons learned in gender and
diversity in project design and research
processes
How can we address research integrity
issues in big research projects? How do we
identify research integrity mechanisms in
our interdisciplinary work? This Researcher
Awareness and Research Integrity module is
designed to open a conversation about
research integrity issues, developing
capacities for researchers, staff and
managers to identify and address them.
The Neuroethics pilot course convened
some leading scholars in the field with the
aim to get feedback on the proposed module
to be offered to HBP and EBRAINS
community and to possible external
audiences. Both the module’s contents (and
introduction to key notions and issues) and
methodology (normative, descriptive,
conceptual) were discussed, and relevant
strategies to optimize them were developed
on the basis of the attendees’ comments and
suggestions.
This course offers an overview of the stateof-the-art neuroethical reflection about
consciousness and cognition, with a
particular focus on two dimensions:
1 Foundational issues related to the
definition of consciousness, including its
possible operationalization in the clinical
context and its implication for potential
technological simulation/emulation.
2 Practical issues related to the detection of
residual consciousness in patients with
Disorders of Consciousness (i.e.,
Vegetative State/Unaware Wakefulness
Syndrome, Minimally Conscious State,
Cognitive-Motor Dissociation).
Through an analysis of the personalised
brain models developed in the HBP and
with an emphasis on the issues raised by
validity, reliability, benefits and risks, and
(continued on next page)

6

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

to enable all the competing needs to be met and yet allow some level of
evaluation at the end. An example of the careful wording of lesson plans
can be seen in the introductory RRI module, where the learning outcomes specify that at the end of the module, participants will: have a
good understanding of RRI including such things as its history, definitions and the HBP RRI approach; critically reflect on work being undertaken in EBRAINS through the use of case studies; identify and apply
relevant tools and resources for RRI in EBRAINS.
To ensure that the plans for delivery of the RRI capacity building
programme are validated, the decision was made to peer-review the
modules and lesson plans. The peer-review process involved inviting
relevant stakeholders from within the HBP and EBRAINS (i.e. HBP researchers, EBRAINS users, data and infrastructure providers, EBRAINS
leadership and management and the EAB, that is, the primary audience
of the capacity-building exercise) to provide written feedback on the
plans and on the pilot demonstration of the modules. The onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic meant that the initial plans for delivering these
modules using a face-to-face format had to be modified to accommodate
travel restrictions. Accordingly, the modules were redesigned to suit an
online audience (Grasenick and Guerrero, 2020).
Three introductory modules were selected for piloting in April 2021.
The modules were on RRI in EBRAINS, Neuroethics in HBP and
EBRAINS, and EBRAINS Data governance. All feedback received was
then used to improve plans for delivering the entire capacity-building
programme. The modules were designed to include a substantial
amount of discussion with participants based on a selection of relevant
case studies. At the end of each delivery, participants were encouraged
to provide feedback which was then used to improve further delivery of
the training programme. For example, while several participants
emphasised the high relevance of case studies for their personal learning
outcome, in one of the pilot modules, a participant provided the
following feedback: “I like the case studies. Send the cases more in
advance.” Similarly, another participant asked for the time available for
discussion to be increased. Such feedback spurred the redesign of
module delivery for the next round of training across the programme
such that the cases were sent well in advance and more time was dedicated to discussion. Thus, feedback from the audience also played a very
important role in shaping the delivery and content of all modules of the
training programme.

Table 2 (continued )
Module

Neuroethics in HBP and EBRAINS

Neuroethics, Brain Research and
Culture

Neuroethics and AI Ethics

Science communication

Description
neuroscience communication and
engagement, the main aim of the course is
to enhance both the science and
understanding of scientific outputs, possible
clinical and social applications, and the
social, ethical, and philosophical issues
raised.
This course offers an essential introduction
to the field of neuroethics, as well as an
analysis and justification of its relevance to
EBRAINS. The goal is to increase the
knowledge and understanding of EBRAINS
users of neuroethical topics and
methodologies in order to identify, assess,
and better manage relevant ethical
questions raised by the research and the
use/exploitation of EBRAINS.
This course analyses the issues associated
with the interaction between cultural
diversity and neuroethics, with the goal of
providing the conceptual tools for
advancing in the direction of multicultural
neuroethics.
The course on Neuroethics and AI ethics
introduces AI ethics, a field that has literally
exploded in the last 10 years, trying to
provide an original contribution through
the reflection on two specific topics: the
connection between neuroethics and AI
ethics, and the analysis of brain-inspired AI
with explicit reference to the work done
within the HBP.
The goal is to raise awareness of the ethical
relevance of AI and to introduce relevant
conceptual tools for identifying and
assessing them.
Designed as a crash course in
communications, the training covers the
basics of how to navigate the media
landscape and the basics of popular science
writing. It includes a talk about impact,
transparency, plain language, inclusion and
accessibility. It also covers social media
communication, how Altmetric data works,
and why this is important.

Reflecting on the outcome of RRI capacity development in the
HBP

towards the end of the capacity development programme.
It was apparent that to ensure the modules were useful for EBRAINS
users, they would need to be structured so that interested persons could
find the relevant resources easily. To illustrate, most researchers conducting research with animals will likely not be particularly interested
in the minutiae of the protection of human data in research. Similarly,
those conducting research with human subjects will not be interested in
animal research ethics compliance requirements. To that end, the team
chose to restructure the three modules as two modules: “Animal Data in
EBRAINS Governance and Compliance” and Human Data in EBRAINSGovernance and Compliance”. This way, topics on data governance
(including data protection) and ethics compliance are made more specific for relevant audiences.
As a starting point, for each module, lesson plans were developed
describing the module, giving an indication of its audience, learning
outcomes, methodology and delivery mechanism, and time plan. All of
these were intended to ensure a good balance between the target audience’s expectations about the training and what can efficiently be
offered in reality considering constraints related to factors such as time;
available resources in terms of manpower and person months; restrictions brought about by COVID-19; and the distributed nature of the
project with researchers spread all over Europe. One of the important
parts of the lesson plans where these considerations had to be encapsulated is the learning outcome which had to be planned in such a way as

As yet, the RRI training programme for the HBP and EBRAINS has
delivered over 40 training events. This has been possible because
module leads for all 17 modules committed to delivering at least two
training events before the end of the project. Interestingly, some modules have gone beyond this commitment to host more training events
than the two events originally planned. For example, the module on
Dual Use has been delivered 6 times already using a variety of formats
some of which have already been documented in a recently published
article (Ulnicane et al., 2022). Also, although the majority of the modules were delivered in stand-alone events, some were done in combination with other events like the HBP Young Researchers training events
and the HBP Student Conference. For example, diversity modules were
regularly delivered at conferences and via the HBP mentoring programme. Recorded lectures and other materials were processed, and in
January 2023, they were made available as an online Ethics & Society
training resource for the HBP, EBRAINS and beyond, to live on as a
legacy on the HBP website12.
So far, over 300 people have participated in the training events
organised as part of the RRI capacity-building programme. This number
12
https://www.humanbrainproject.eu/en/science-development/ethics-andsociety/ethics-society-training-resources/

7

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

has considerably exceeded the target number of 200 set out at the
beginning of the programme. Despite the successes of organising and
hosting these RRI training events, one challenge experienced was
regarding attendance. This is because, in some of these events, the
volume of attendance varied considerably. While in some cases the
attendance was as high as 40 (e.g., the Science Communication
training), for most online events the number of participants who joined
was significantly lower than the registrations received. For example, in a
recently completed training event on ‘Neuroethical reflection on consciousness and cognition’ 70 people registered but only 22 participants
attended. Also, in at least one case, the training event planned for the
day had to be cancelled as only a couple of participants were present
despite up to 20 people indicating their interest and registering to attend
the training.
Although clear explanations for the attendance issues cannot be
provided, one apparent explanation might be what many now term
‘zoom fatigue’ - a situation where people find video meetings exhausting
or draining (Fosslien and Duffy, 2020; Fauville, Luo, Queiroz, Bailenson,
& Hancock, 2021). With work, socialising, meetings, workshops etc. all
moving online, many have found it quite exhausting (even when they
have an interest) to attend events especially when they are not
mandatory. Another reason may be that existing workloads may have
resulted in interested persons prioritising other work and therefore
impacted their ability to attend the RRI capacity building events. Also,
the fact that since the RRI training events are free and without charge,
some who have registered may have felt little or no commitment to
attending them.
As noted earlier, each module was developed with clear lesson plans
that highlight, among other things, learning outcomes (skills/knowledge that participants are expected to gain at the end of each module). In
developing the lesson plans, a challenge that had to be addressed was
how to evaluate learning outcomes to assess the effectiveness of learning
and development and to determine what worked and what did not work
as anticipated. To enable the evaluation of the training programme and
gauge participants’ progress toward learning outcomes, a standard
survey was developed by the capacity building team to be completed by
each participant at training events. Participants were asked to assess
how well the module met their expectations, what was the most
important thing they learned from the module, how satisfied they were
with the content of the module, and how satisfied they were with the
overall format of the module.
Among other things, participants could respond to questions using
the following 6-point rating scale: extremely satisfied, very satisfied,
somewhat satisfied, not so satisfied, and dissatisfied. Participants were
also given an opportunity to provide additional feedback and comments
in a section on the feedback form for additional comments. This concept
was adapted to various formats where the RRI training modules were
integrated into existing programmes such as the HBP mentoring programme, or educational events organised by the HBP education team
such as the HBP student conferences and HBP Young Researchers events.
In such cases, the feedback mechanism was adapted to suit already
existing feedback practices. In addition to the structured approach,
module leads also made a point to always consider the diversity of
participants by using different mechanisms to request feedback. For
example, by offering the opportunity to provide verbal feedback during
or after the event, using the chat functionality of video conferencing
software and using emails to provide written feedback. A summary of
the outcome of the feedback received using the structured approach can
be seen in Table 3.
As shown in the above table, overall, 2% of participants had some
level of dissatisfaction with the content of the training they attended.
Most responses (96%) fell within the ranges of extremely satisfied to
satisfied. Also, when asked whether the module met their expectations,
only one participant out of those who responded to the feedback suggested some level of dissatisfaction while the response of the majority
(80%) was within the range of very satisfied to extremely satisfied with

Table 3
Outcome of participant feedback on training.
Level of
Satisfaction

Did the module
meet your
expectations? (%)

How satisfied are
you with the
content of this
module? (%)

How satisfied are
you with the overall
format of this
module? (%)

dissatisfied
not so
satisfied
somewhat
satisfied
satisfied
very satisfied
extremely
satisfied

0
2

2
2

0
2

18

4

2

0
31
49

22
42
28

20
40
36

the others (18%) being somewhat satisfied. An indication of the reason
why, despite the positive feedback, a considerable proportion felt that
their expectations were not met can be seen in the additional comments
left by the participants. Most comments suggested the way the cases
were discussed or the amount of time available for discussing the cases
was insufficient and would have preferred more time for discussions.
Likewise, when asked about their satisfaction with the overall format of
the module, 2% of the participants said they were not so satisfied while a
total of 91% were either satisfied, very satisfied or extremely satisfied.
In summary, it can be said that, despite some marginal points to be
improved, the majority of participants were mostly very satisfied with
the training provided and the overall format, and that it met their expectations. Thus, this section gives some indication of the level of success and some of the challenges of the RRI capacity development
programme.
Measuring the impact of RRI Capacity Building Activities Since the
early days of Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI), questions have
been asked about the impact of RRI activities. In some cases, addressing
them has become a requirement of the Research Excellence Framework
(REF) (Grigorov, Elbæk, Rettberg, & Davidson, 2015) and sometimes is
required by funders as part of the review process of RRI-linked research
projects. It is no surprise, then, that similar questions have been asked
about the RRI capacity-building programme developed for the HBP and
EBRAINS.
Impact is often taken to mean a longer-term sustainable change that
can emerge from a specific activity or the changes that will happen as a
result. The RRI community is divided on the issue of whether RRI impact
can be measured. There have been attempts to develop practical and
theory-based impact evaluations for RRI activities. These have largely
focused on the RRI keys. For example, Strand and Spaapen, (2020) have
suggested that the impact of RRI can be measured by using defined indicators such as the SMART (specific, measurable, attainable, relevant
and timely). However, the possibility of applying these impact
measuring tools to the principles contained in RRI frameworks like
AREA and ARIR i.e. ‘‘anticipation, reflexivity, inclusion and responsiveness" (Stilgoe et al., 2013), is yet to be fully explored (Bührer et al.,
2021). In fact, others strongly argue against it. For example, Owen, von
Schomberg and Macnaghten (2021) have argued that SMART performance indicators would "inexorably become tethered” to the five keys (i.
e., the RRI keys promoted by the EC) and further reify these as being
synonymous with RRI. Furthermore, they argue that such attempts including well-intentioned ones that aim to make RRI pragmatic,
actionable, and measurable must be resisted.
It has also been suggested that the complex nature of RRI means that
RRI performance cannot be directly measured. According to van de Poel
(2020) the reliability of measures of RRI performance must be questioned as the normative nature of RRI makes it difficult to objectively
measure its real value. Similarly, the validity of such measures must also
be questioned as RRI interventions are simply aimed at improving
processes of innovation from a societal point of view rather than an
absolute level of ‘responsibility’. As learning programmes, like those
8

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

developed by the HBP Ethics and Society RRI capacity building programme, are aimed at improving RRI performance through the development of relevant RRI capabilities, it can be seen why it is difficult to
measure the impact of such activities. The challenges of measuring the
impact of the RRI capacity-building programme are compounded by the
fact that the programme is not a stand-alone initiative, but it builds on
the work of other RRI-related activities, processes and groups that have
been an important part of the HBP throughout the years of the project.
Nevertheless, this does not imply that such activities do not have a
positive impact. In fact, significant impact is visible in areas such as the
integration of ethics into data processing workflows (Stahl, Rainey,
Harris, & Fothergill, 2018; Eke et al., 2021); in addressing dual use and
misuse (Ulnicane et al., 2022); the conceptual expansion of neuroethics
(Evers, 2017; Salles et al., 2019); integration of inclusion and reflection
on diversity in the HBP (Grasenick et al., 2022); and processes and
structures for public engagement (Bitsch et al., 2020). The RRI capacity
development activities represent a specific model and further efforts to
formalise and sustain the impact of RRI activities in the HBP and
EBRAINS, through the provision of access to training both in the project
and beyond and by making capacity-building resources available as a
legacy of the RRI related work.
As per funding requirements, there is an expectation that key performance indicators for impact are identified. However, that does not
fully capture the capacity to act responsibly, and this is mainly because
this capacity is not the result of linear effort, and partly because the
capacity to act responsibly or the capability of responsiveness is only
measurable when a legitimate action is either performed or withheld.
Owen et al. (2013) have also described responsiveness as the coupling of
reflection and deliberation into action that has a material influence on
the direction and trajectory of innovation itself. Thus, while it is possible
to, for example, measure how many engagement activities were conducted, or the number of people who participated in those events, and,
to some extent, determine the quality of the engagement activity
through feedback and participant comments, the impact of such activities can only be measured when it leads to some material outcome.
Perhaps one way to conceptualise and anticipate the impact of RRI
capacity building in the HBP is through the lens of the Horizon Europe
Framework programme’s Key Impact Pathways, a monitoring approach
developed to capture and communicate impact in three domains: the
scientific domain, social domain, and technological/economic domain.
For this discourse, one of the relevant pathways to scientific impact is
Key Impact Pathway 2 (or KIP 2) concerned with ‘Strengthening Human
Capital in Research and Innovation i.e., R&I (Nixon, 2022). KIP 2 is
designed to show improvements in skills, career (reputation) and
working conditions which correspond to short-term, medium-term and
long-term indicators. The short-term indicator (skills) measures the
number of researchers involved in upskilling (i.e., training, mentoring/coaching, mobility and access to R&I infrastructures). The
medium-term indicator (career) measures the number and share of
upskilled researchers in Horizon Europe’s projects with an increased
H-Index – where the H-index is a metric that combines research productivity (i.e. the volume of output) with impact (i.e. citation volume).
Thus, the H-Index is simply a count of the number of articles published
by an author versus the citations gathered. And the long-term indicator
(working conditions) measures the number and share of skilled workers
that are involved in a funded research programme having improved
working conditions including the researcher’s salaries. It is based on a
survey that seeks to understand job security by collecting data on contract type, satisfaction with pension/social security provisions, and
other working conditions.
The most relevant of the 3 indicators of KIP 2 for the type of RRI
capacity development provided for the HBP and EBRAINS community is
short-term indicators which measure the number of researchers
involved in the training. As indicated in the previous section, the result
of this measure was over 300 researchers participating in the training
provided. The nature of the medium-term and long-term KIP 2

indicators make them unsuitable for use for the type of training provided
by the ethics and society team because the parameters measured are
neither directly related to the RRI training activities nor do they provide
a direct measure of its.
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that within the HBP different structures in the project form a framework that supports responsible research
and innovation, equipping junior and senior researchers with the
knowledge they need to act responsibly. Examples of this are the visible
governance structures, tangible cross-disciplinary research activities in
the form of joint research publications, and the provision of necessary
conceptual and ethical tools to identify and assess potential ethical issues arising from their work. Thus, while the training delivered through
this capacity-building programme serves as an important building block
that can establish a foundation for acting responsibly, it is not the only
vehicle for facilitating the type of positive societal impact that RRI
promotes. With the pathway model, the impact is built into the inner
workings of the HBP: enabling a generation of researchers who have
been trained in responsible research and innovation practices.
Summary and Conclusion
RRI capabilities can be developed through training and capacitybuilding activities that develop and strengthen skills and abilities that
researchers in projects like the HBP and users of infrastructures like
EBRAINS need in order to thrive and adapt in this fast-changing world.
The ability to integrate such competencies in a fast-changing environment is referred to as capability. The need to build RRI capacities and
hence develop necessary capabilities has been linked to responsiveness –
an important dimension of RRI. This has been recognised since the early
days of the development of RRI and has been identified as a suitable
means of institutionalising RRI by funders including the EPSRC and the
European Commission.
Several RRI-related projects have been funded to build RRI capacities. Analyses of these projects have shown that a common way to
identify the required capabilities is through engagement with diverse
stakeholders. To some extent, some of the programmes have been
influenced by the outcomes of systematic reviews. The outcomes were
very often the development of RRI training resources and events –
ranging from a single course to up to 10 programmes.
In a similar vein, over the past three years, members of the Ethics and
Society Team of the HBP have embarked on an extensive RRI capacitybuilding exercise targeting HBP researchers, EBRAINS users, data, and
infrastructure providers, EBRAINS leadership and management, and
interested external audiences. Here, we have shown that the HBP/
EBRAINS RRI capacity development initiative has relied on similar
processes of engagement with stakeholders for identifying RRI capabilities and for developing the resources and training models used. This
programme has also built on the legacy of the Ethics and Society work
carried out since the inception of the HBP as well as other RRI-related
structures, strategies, and processes developed for the HBP. In terms
of content and style of delivery, the HBP’s capacity-building programme
has been influenced by:
- lessons learned from previous work carried out by the HBP Ethics
and Society team and published in various academic publications
and three joint Opinions on RRI-related topics of high relevance to
the HBP.
- thematic elements of the RRI AREA framework which has largely
informed the work of the Ethics and Society group, stressing anticipatory ethics, critical reflection and public/stakeholders
engagement.
- the dialogic approach to RRI that has influenced much of the RRIrelated work in the HBP
- existing governance structures developed for the HBP by the Ethics
and Society team such as Working Groups and Committees.
9

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

G. Ogoh et al.

- thematic areas that are of direct relevance to brain research which is
the main research focus of the HBP and EBRAINS, e.g., neuroethics
and ethics of brain-inspired AI.

Evers, K. (2017). The contribution of neuroethics to international brain research
initiatives. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 18(1), 1–2.
Fauville, G., Luo, M., Queiroz, A. C. M., Bailenson, J. N., & Hancock, J. (2021). Zoom
Exhaustion & Fatigue Scale. Computers in Human Behavior Reports, 4, 100119.
Fosslien, L., & Duffy, M. W. (2020). How to combat zoom fatigue. Harvard Business
Review, 29 Apr.
Grasenick, K., Beranek, S., Godfroy, A.-S., Reidl, S., Romero, P. F., Schiffbänker, H.,
Stadlbauer, J., Trattnig, J., Wolffram, A., & Waechter, C. (2022). The Gendered
Analog-Digital Divide in Virtual Academia: 20th Annual STS Conference Graz 2022
„Critical Issues in Science, Technology and Society Studies. In G. Getzinger,
M. Jahrbacher, & F. Häller (Eds.) (pp. 93–110).
Grasenick, K., & Guerrero, M. (2020). Responsible research and innovation & digital
inclusiveness during Covid-19 crisis in the human brain project (HBP). Journal of
Responsible Technology, 1, Article 100001.
Grigorov, I., Elbæk, M., Rettberg, N. and Davidson, J. (2015) Winning Horizon 2020 With
Open Science. FP7 FOSTER & FP7 OpenAIRE+.
Hally R., O’Mahony C. and Burns K. (2018) D3.2 Report on trialling of RRI teaching
strategies including an executive summary of the completed pilots including case
studies and teaching materials for widespread dissemination. Cork, Ireland:
EnRRICH Project.
Joey, R., Karlage, A., Etheridge, J., Alade, M., Fifield, J.Goodwin, C., … (2021). Adaptive
Learning Guide: A pathway to stronger collaboration, learning, and adapting.
Washington, DC: USAID MOMENTUM.
Keene, P. (2022). Supporting researchers in dealing with social, ethical and regulatory
issues - the EMBRACE project [Online] Ethics Dialogues. Available from: htt
ps://www.ethicsdialogues.eu/2022/04/06/supporting-researchers-in-dealing-with
-social-ethical-and-regulatory-issues-the-embrace-project/ [Accessed 15/11/22].
Nixon, J. (2022). Study to support the monitoring and evaluation of the framework
programme for research and innovation along key impact pathways: indicator
methodology and metadata handbook. LU: Publications office of the European
commission. Directorate General for Research and Innovation.
(Ola) and O’Donovan, C., Michalec, A., & Moon, J. R. (2022). Capabilities for
transdisciplinary research. Research Evaluation, 31(1), 145–158.
Otto, H. U., & Ziegler, H. (2006). Capabilities and education. Social Work and Society, 4.
Owen, R., Stilgoe, J., Macnaghten, P., Gorman, M., Fisher, E. and Guston, D. (2013) A
framework for responsible innovation. Responsible innovation: Managing the
responsible emergence of science and innovation in society, pp. 27–50.
Owen, R., von Schomberg, R., & Macnaghten, P. (2021). An unfinished journey?
Reflections on a decade of responsible research and innovation. Journal of
Responsible Innovation, 8(2), 217–233.
van de Poel, I. (2020). RRI measurement and assessment. Assessment of responsible
innovation (pp. 339–360). London: Routledge.
Principe, P. (2020). Training, community engagement & support report (Deliverable 4.2).
Braga, Portugal: Fostering Improved Training Tools for Responsible Research and
Innovation) Fit4RRI.
Salles, A., Stahl, B., Bjaalie, J., Domingo-Ferrer, J., Rose, N., Rainey, S., & Spranger, T.
(2021). Opinion and Action Plan on Data Protection and Privacy. Ethics & Society - The
Human Brain Project.
Salles, A., Evers, K., & Farisco, M. (2019). The need for a conceptual expansion of
neuroethics. AJOB Neuroscience, 10(3), 126–128.
STAHL, B. C., et al. (2023). Assessing responsible innovation training. Journal of
Responsible Technology (forthcoming).
Stahl, B. C., et al. (2021). From responsible research and innovation to responsibility by
design. Journal of Responsible Innovation, 8(2), 175–198.
STAHL, B. C. (2019). Beyond research ethics: dialogues in neuro-ICT research. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00105
Smith, R., Bernstein, M. J., O’Donovan, C., & Cuttica, F. (2022). Capabilities to support
responsible research & innovation in European biotechnology: Funding Cultures Lab
Working Paper. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh.
Stahl, B. C., Rainey, S., Harris, E., & Fothergill, B. T. (2018). The role of ethics in data
governance of large neuro-ICT projects. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, 25(8), 1099–1107.
Steen, M., Nauta, J., Gaasterland, R., & Ogier, S. (2018). Institutionalizing Responsible
Research and Innovation: Case Studies. Innovation, The Name of The Game. The
International Society for Professional Innovation Management ISPIM 17-20 June 2018.
Stockholm, Sweeden: ISPIM.
Stilgoe, J., Owen, R., & Macnaghten, P. (2013). Developing a framework for responsible
innovation. Research policy, 42(9), 1568–1580.
Strand, R., Spaapen, J., Yaghmaei, E., & van de Poel, I. (2020). Locomotive breath? Post
festum reflections on the EC expert group on policy indicators for responsible
research and innovation. Assessment of responsible innovation: Methods and practices.
London: Routledge.
Tassone, V., & Eppink, H. (2016). Deliverable 2.3 The EnRRICH tool for educators: (Re-)
Designing curricula in higher education from a “Responsible Research and Innovation”
perspective. Wageningen, Netherlands: EnRRICH Project.
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28(13),
1319–1350.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic
management. Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
Ten Holter, C., Stahl, B., & Jirotka, M. (2022). Built in, not bolted on: responsible
innovation in UK centres for doctoral training – the new normal? The Learning
Organization. https://doi.org/10.1108/TLO-09-2021-0117 [Online] Available from:
[Accessed 29/01/2023].

The outcome of this programme includes the development of 17
modules, over 40 training events, and the training of over 300 members
of the HBP, EBRAINS users, and interested external publics. It has also
resulted in the curation of online training resources for each of the
modules including the recorded presentations. Case materials have also
been made available online to enable active learning and stimulate
critical reflection, deliberation, and anticipation of social and ethical
issues of brain research and innovation. We have also discussed the
difficulty of measuring the impact of these activities as they are only
designed to enable participants to develop the dynamic RRI capabilities
necessary for sustainability in a fast-changing world.
In the HBP, RRI capabilities have also been developed through
collaborative research activities and governance structures across the
project. The training modules have reinforced tacit knowledge gained
through interaction and engagement with groups like the Data Governance Working Group, Diversity and Equal Opportunities Committee,
Dual Use Working Group, Ethics Rapporteur Programme, and crosscutting (or embedded) research tasks in science work packages. As key
performance indicators, it is only possible to measure the number of
individuals that engage with particular structures and activities over
time. Making online resources available to EBRAINS users enables some
level of measurement of reach and the level of engagement with training
materials. However, such metrics can only be used as a key performance
indicator for awareness raising, delivery of information and reach, not as
indicators for capacity to act responsibly.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This project/research has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation under Grant Agreements No. 720270 (HBP SGA1), 785907 (HBP
SGA2), 945539 (HBP SGA3) and the Framework Partnership Agreement
No. 650003.
References
Aicardi, C., Akintoye, S., Fothergill, B. T., Guerrero, M., Klinker, G., Knight, W., …
Ulnicane, I. (2020). Ethical and Social Aspects of Neurorobotics. Science and
Engineering Ethics, 26(5), 2533–2546.
Aicardi, C., Bitsch, L., Bådum, icklas, B., Datta, S., Evers, K., … Ulnicane, I. (2018).
Opinion on ‘Responsible Dual Use. Political, Security, Intelligence and Military Research of
Concern in Neuroscience and Neurotechnology. Ethics & Society - The Human Brain
Project.
Altimus, C. M., Marlin, B. J., Charalambakis, N. E., Colón-Rodríguez, A., Glover, E. J.,
Izbicki, P., … Wells, M. F. (2019). The Next 50 Years of Neuroscience. Journal of
Neuroscience, 40(1), 101–106.
Amunts, K., Knoll, A. C., Lippert, T., Pennartz, C. M. A., Ryvlin, P., Destexhe, A., …
Bjaalie, J. G. (2019). The Human Brain Project—Synergy between neuroscience,
computing, informatics, and brain-inspired technologies. PLoS Biology, 17(7),
e3000344.
Andrews, K. R., Christensen, C. R., Guth, W. D., & Learned, E. P. (1969). Business policy:
text and cases. Rev. Homewood, Ill.: Irwin.
Bitsch L., Bådum B.N. and Palsberg A. (2020) Lessons from stakeholder engagement and
dialogue. Denmark: human brain project public engagement, nt, the danish board of
technology foundatio.
Bührer, S., Yorulma, M., Feudo, F., Reichmann, S., Gomez, L.B., Kinnula, M., Laar, M.
van, Shauna, M.B., Rüfenacht, S. and Riemenschneider, D. (2021) Measuring the
Impact of RRI: Lessons learned from Pilot Action 1 of the Social Lab No. 15 SwafS.
Eke, D., Aasebø, I. E. J., Akintoye, S., Knight, W., Karakasidis, A., Mikulan, E., … Zehl, L.
(2021). Pseudonymisation of neuroimages and data protection: Increasing access to
data while retaining scientific utility. Neuroimage: Reports, 1(4), 100053.

10

G. Ogoh et al.

Journal of Responsible Technology 15 (2023) 100065

Tokalić, R., Buljan, I., Mejlgaard, N., Carrió, M., Lang, A., Revuelta, G., & Marušić, A.
(2021). Responsible research and innovation training programs: implementation and
evaluation of the HEIRRI project. Forensic Sciences Research, 6(4), 320–330.

Ulnicane, I., Mahfoud, T., & Salles, A. (2022). Experimentation, learning, and dialogue:
an RRI-inspired approach to dual-use of concern. Journal of Responsible Innovation,
1–18.
UN Habitat. (2019). Capacity Building Strategy 2020–2030. Nairobi: United Nations.

11

