Journal of European Public Policy

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjpp20

Governing AI – attempting to herd cats?
Introduction to the special issue on the
Governance of Artificial Intelligence
Tim Büthe, Christian Djeffal, Christoph Lütge, Sabine Maasen & Nora von
Ingersleben-Seip
To cite this article: Tim Büthe, Christian Djeffal, Christoph Lütge, Sabine Maasen & Nora von
Ingersleben-Seip (2022) Governing AI – attempting to herd cats? Introduction to the special issue
on the Governance of Artificial Intelligence, Journal of European Public Policy, 29:11, 1721-1752,
DOI: 10.1080/13501763.2022.2126515
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.2126515

Published online: 04 Nov 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1293

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjpp20

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY
2022, VOL. 29, NO. 11, 1721–1752
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.2126515

INTRODUCTION

Governing AI – attempting to herd cats? Introduction
to the special issue on the Governance of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
Tim Büthe a,b,c,d, Christian Djeﬀal b,e, Christoph Lütge
Sabine Maaseng and Nora von Ingersleben-Seip a,b

b,f

,

a

Hochschule für Politik München/Munich School of Politics and Public Policy at the Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; bTUM School of Social Sciences and Technology,
Department of Governance, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; cTUM School
of Management, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; dSanford School of Public
Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; eTUM School of Social Sciences and Technology,
Department of Science and Technology Studies, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany; fInstitute for Ethics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany; gFaculty of Business, Economics, and Social Sciences, University of Hamburg,
Hamburg, Germany
ABSTRACT

Artiﬁcial Intelligence raises new, distinct governance challenges, as well as
familiar governance challenges in novel ways. The governance of AI,
moreover, is not an issue of distant futures, it is well underway – and it has
characteristics akin to ‘herding cats’ with a mind of their own. This essay
introduces the contributions to the special issue, situating them in broader
political and social science literatures. It then provides a sketch of an
interdisciplinary research agenda. It highlights the limits of ’explainable AI’,
makes the case for considering AI ethics and AI governance simultaneously,
identiﬁes as an underappreciated risk ’system eﬀects’ that arise from the
introduction of AI applications, and calls for policymakers to consider both
the opportunities and the risks of AI. Focusing on the (ab)uses of AI, rather
than the complex, rapidly changing and hard-to-predict technology as such,
might provide a superior approach to governing AI.
KEYWORDS Artiﬁcial intelligence; governance; regulation; ethics; disruptive technology; algorithms;
responsibility; technology assessment

Introduction
This special issue brings together a diverse set of papers to examine distinctive challenges and opportunities in the governance of AI from a variety of
perspectives, reﬂecting our commitment to a multi-disciplinary, multi-level
and multi-dimensional approach to the governance of complex socioCONTACT Tim Büthe

buthe@hfp.tum.de

© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

1722

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

technical processes, which requires addressing both particularities and
general issues. Accordingly, the special issue contains, in addition to this
introductory essay, ﬁve articles that raise matters of general concern by
delving deep into speciﬁc topics. Notwithstanding their diverse perspectives
and substantive foci, the papers focus on political and public policy aspects of
the topic, so as to advance the social-scientiﬁc understanding of AI, as well as
enable public policies guided by the spirit of ‘handle with care, not fear’
(Renda, 2019, pp. 21ﬀ).
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is the focus of much controversial discussion,
including among scholars and policymakers in Europe and beyond, often
without a clear understanding of what makes it distinctive. It is variously
described as ‘the technology of the future,’ an already widely used ‘general
purpose technology,’ a particular ‘key technology,’ or a ‘set’ of quite
diverse technologies. Such diﬀerent conceptions and deﬁnitions do not just
prompt academic debates. How we deﬁne AI matters, inter alia for the
rights of stakeholders: when laws and regulations assign speciﬁc rights and
obligations to AI users (and others aﬀected by the use of AI), those rights
hinge upon what is considered an AI application or system.1
Ambiguity about the deﬁnitional boundaries of AI also contributes to
sharply divergent reactions: Some categorically reject AI as exceedingly disruptive (Babcock et al., 2019; Bostrom, 2014; Armstrong & Pamlin, 2015; Armstrong et al., 2016) or fear AI as threatening important enlightenment
traditions such as transparency and accountability in the exercise of power
(Bryson & Theodorou, 2019; Floridi & Cowls, 2022). Others admire it, often
uncritically (e.g., Shadbolt et al., 2016) – and indeed AI is enabling phenomenal advances in, e.g., predictions based on pattern recognition, which make
it possible to use the wealth of data that characterize the digital age to
achieve otherwise unobtainable gains in economic eﬃciency (TCS, 2017),
environmental sustainability (ITU, 2021; Khan, 2022), or medical treatments
(Hamet & Tremblay, 2017; He et al., 2019). Yet others consider the adoption
of AI simply inevitable, similar to previous technologies that gave a competitive advantage to early adopters in the global economy and in world politics
(Milner & Solstad, 2021), though they might still warn of the risks of dangerous AI-fuelled arms races (NSCAI, 2021; Walker, 2021). In sum, how we deﬁne
AI also matters for normative assessment. So how might we deﬁne AI?

AI: attempt at a deﬁnition
While AI has attracted much attention, there are still substantive struggles
concerning even the deﬁnition of AI. Disagreements about the deﬁnition
start in computer science (Russell & Norvig, 2020, pp. 19–23), where the
term was initially coined in a grant application in 1955. McCarthy et al.
(1955) in fact did not really deﬁne the term but merely stressed that the

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1723

‘study [of artiﬁcial intelligence] is to proceed on the basis of the conjecture
that every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it.’2
Having left the deﬁnition of AI largely open – and approaching it as a (set
of) general purpose technologies – may have been a strength in that it
allowed a range of diﬀerent technologies to be subsumed under the AI
concept (see, e.g., Crafts, 2021; Djeﬀal, 2019, pp. 256–260; Gasser et al.,
2018, p. 3). Conversations about ‘artiﬁcial intelligence’ thus show considerable continuity even as data structures changed, computing capacities
exploded, and algorithmic approaches evolved, e.g., from linear to Bayesian
to machine learning, which is at the center of contemporary discussions of
AI. Leaving the deﬁnition of AI open also facilitates continuing to subsume
future technological breakthroughs under the umbrella of AI.
At the same time, vagueness due to the lack of a deﬁnition comes at a cost.
Many policy instruments employ only partial or preliminary deﬁnitions – or
refrain from providing a deﬁnition at all – which creates uncertainty and
invites ex post conﬂicts, including costly litigation, about the applicability of
any particular measure. It also creates challenges in the legislative and regulatory process as, for instance, diﬀerent committees of the European Parliament currently hold diﬀerent – and in some cases widely diﬀerent – views
on the deﬁnition of AI (2022a, 2022b). The lack of a clear deﬁnition, moreover,
invites ‘concept stretching’ in lieu of fruitful concept development (Sartori,
1970; Collier & Mahon, 1993; Munck, 2004). Such stretching impedes analytical precision and knowledge accumulation in scholarship and encourages
loose talk in lieu of productive deliberation in policy discussions.
We cannot resolve, or authoritatively settle, the deﬁnitional controversies here.
But to encourage conceptual clarity, we set out an explicit deﬁnition early on:
For purposes of this special issue, we understand AI as systems that combine
means of gathering inputs from the external environment with technologies
for processing these inputs and relating them algorithmically to previously
stored data, allowing such systems to carry out a wide variety of tasks with
some degree of autonomy, i.e., without simultaneous, ongoing human intervention. Their capacity for learning allows AI systems to solve problems and
thus support, emulate or even improve upon human decision-making –
though (at least at this point of technological development) not holistically
but only with regard to well-speciﬁed, albeit possibly quite complex tasks.3

Contributors were free to diverge or take issue with this deﬁnition, but were
asked to do so explicitly.

From concept to governance
The above deﬁnition is meant to foster multi- and interdisciplinary research
and debate, based on recognizing both the risks and opportunities of AI.

1724

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

Many of the fundamental ideas underlying AI have in principle been known
since the 1950s. AI, however, tends to be ‘data-hungry’ and computationintensive, which for several decades limited the potential for implementing
those ideas. Only quite recently have exponential increases in sensor capabilities, data storage capacity, and computing power started to make a wide
range of new – and to some extent previously unimaginable – applications
of AI possible. This development has been accompanied by the proliferation
of discourses about AI and a shift of technological development to speciﬁc
issue areas like mobility, health, industry 4.0, smart cities, etc. These rapid
developments make AI and its governance a very timely issue.
Many new AI applications hold tremendous promise for improving quality
of life, reducing severe risks, and enabling leaps in factor productivity and
hence economic growth – while simultaneously reducing environmental
harm. Massively improved AI-driven speech recognition and ever less invasive, AI-connected sensory devices, for instance, empower mobility-impaired
individuals and can reduce loneliness and isolation (DiNuovo, 2018; Kiron &
Unruh, 2019). AI-powered decision-support systems reduce the risks of
potentially fatal medical treatment errors (Guo & Li, 2018; Topol, 2019). AIpowered blind spot warning systems for trucks save the lives of pedestrians
and bicyclists (Stephan, 2018). In addition and often simultaneously, AI promises reductions in environmental harm. A wide range of gains in factor productivity are made possible by AI-driven increases in the eﬃcient usage of
resources (Furman & Seamans, 2018). And new AI-driven solar energy bundling, a very recent breakthrough development, enables even the production
of steel and cement, which requires exceptionally large amounts of energy,
without emitting any greenhouse gases (Nield, 2019). Policymakers – and citizens – generally do not want to impede these beneﬁts of AI through the way
AI is governed, and they indeed might even want to encourage the beneﬁcial
development of AI (Busse & Baeva, 2022).
At the same time, AI comes with considerable risks, which are often perceived as threats – in many instances for good reasons. These threats
include potentially radical, rapid changes in the workplace and in labor
markets, since AI allows not just further advances in traditional automation
(replacing manual labor) but enables ‘intelligent tools’ (Zysman & Kenney,
2017) to perform a broad range of the tasks traditionally done by highly
trained people, such as examining x-rays or extracting pertinent information
(and increasingly better than people). Other key concerns are unanticipated
malfunctions, as well as insuﬃcient IT security, resulting in the hacking of AI
systems and other cyber security risks. AI also creates or exacerbates risks for
politics and public policy: Fabricated information, including falsiﬁed or wholly
invented documents, images, and data (‘deep fakes’), created with powerful
AI applications that make it ever harder to detect them as fakes, has already
been used to manipulate the political behavior of various target groups in the

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1725

run-up to elections (and referenda such as Brexit), thus threatening the viability of anything like a deliberative process in democratic societies. And the
development of sophisticated delivery systems, capable of autonomously
transporting and detonating nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons,
greatly increases the threat potential of those who can obtain such
weapons and might accelerate the military escalation of a conﬂict in a
foreign policy crisis.
AI thus is neither inherently good nor inherently malign or evil. Rather, AI
raises new, distinct governance challenges, as well as challenges that are familiar from other cases of technology governance (e.g., Christou & Simpson,
2011) and ‘disruptive technological change’ (Hasselbalch, 2018), albeit in
arguably novel ways. The key question for public policy, therefore, is not
whether to categorically accept or reject AI but rather how to govern it.
Governments, individual companies and private sector bodies, civil society
organizations, multi-stakeholder initiatives, and various academics have put
forth a large number of proposals for governing AI. They range from norms
and standards, guidelines, and policies, to laws and regulations. Many of
these initiatives and public policies have been developed at the local or
national level. The OECD has identiﬁed 1459 AI-related policy measures,
from funding to legally binding regulations, among its member states
alone (OECD.AI, 2021).4 Increasingly, proposals for AI governance have also
been developed at the transnational and international levels. The European
Union, in particular, has become a major arena for AI governance. The European Commission joined 15 states to develop a strategy on AI (2018), which
prompted the development of numerous strategies in member states. The
President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, has designated
AI as one of the ﬁve top priorities of her tenure (2019). A Proposal for an Artiﬁcial Intelligence Act is underway (European Commission, 2021), as well as a
discussion of new rules for civil liability (European Parliament, 2020), etc.
The European Parliament has stressed the importance of AI on numerous
occasions, recently also in its resolution on AI (2022c). A European multi-stakeholder dialogue has brought diﬀerent voices together (Pagallo et al.,
2019).5

What needs to be governed?
Productively and eﬀectively governing AI requires understanding what
makes AI distinctive and what therefore the most important issues are to
warrant governance. Three elements or characteristics of AI stand out, discussed in greater detail in the paper by Nitzberg and Zysman (2022). First,
AI relies upon very large quantities of data, making access to data a very
important issue for AI governance, including the rights of individuals and

1726

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

institutional or commercial ’owners’ of massive databases to restrict others’
access to data, as well as the limits of such rights.
AI generally delivers better outcomes the more data it can draw upon.
Sometimes, it may consequently be crucial to ensure access to a wealth of
data, including (if data security concerns can be addressed) personal (identiﬁed) data. Access to detailed medical histories and even genetic information,
for instance, holds great promise for phenomenal progress in developing
treatments for rare diseases and for personalized medicine. Yet, sometimes,
we might not want AI to draw upon certain information, even if it is
readily available. When AI, for example, is used to estimate credit default
risks (and thus access to ﬁnance) or cost-neutral health insurance premiums,
we might not want to allow it to use even basic demographic information
such as sex, gender, age, or the neighborhood in which the person resides,
because it would perpetuate inequities or introduce new forms of bias
(see, e.g., Obermeyer et al., 2019).
Second, AI is distinct from traditional forms of data management and analysis
in that it entails (semi-)autonomous learning, which can be the source of both
risks and opportunities. How learning takes place therefore is a crucial, distinctive issue for AI governance. AI is generally very good at ﬁnding locally optimal
solutions, even in very complex, multi-dimensional issue spaces, but it cannot
on its own determine what to optimize. As Nitzberg and Zysman put it,
decisions about ‘when, where, and how’ AI optimizes ‘reﬂect’ societal goals
and norms (2022, p. 1763), and indeed, such decisions often are a function of
trade-oﬀs between multiple values. AI might of course be used to discern
what those social norms are. And if we subscribe to a revealed preferences
approach and a consequentialist ethic, AI might in fact be better at detecting
human preferences and apparent priorities than most people are themselves.
But notice that delegating the choice of what is to be optimized (or relying
on AI decision support for making the choice) implies having consciously
made an even more fundamental normative decision that we should not
want machines to make for us. What our preferences are (or at least which considerations should go into a decision) is thus central to AI governance.
Third, common elements of AI use raise some issues that can be addressed
at a general level, but most of the action in AI is in its myriad combinations
with very diﬀerent socio-technical systems such as exoskeletonous robotic
devices, chatbots, or content moderation on social media and prediction
engines. Such combinations can create new, distinctive functionalities in
many diﬀerent areas, such as healthcare, public security, games, and consumer goods and industrial production.
One key issue is therefore how general or speciﬁc AI governance can or
should be. Ultimately both the general and the speciﬁc challenges raised
by the use of AI will need to be addressed, and the new challenges, which
AI raises for governance, can diﬀer quite a bit across diverse AI applications.

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1727

In an ideal world, AI governance and the development of applied AI technology would therefore proceed together and iteratively. An iterative approach
also would be desirable because the speciﬁc ‘possibilities, applications, and
risks’ do not just follow deductively from characteristics of the technology,
but ‘only emerge in the early years’ of the development of the technology
(Nitzberg & Zysman, 2022, p. 1754). As Nitzberg and Zysman point out,
however, given the high likelihood of path-dependent developments, such
an iterative approach ‘is not feasible as we have a narrow window for implementing technology governance’ (2022, p. 1759).

The articles in this special issue
The issue starts with Mark Nitzberg and John Zysman’s article on ‘The Diverse
Challenges of Governing AI.’ They begin by putting AI into its historical and
technological context, which culminates in a discussion of the capabilities
of AI and the limits that diﬀerentiate it from human intelligence – above all
regarding ‘fundamental aspects of human cognition and interpretation’:
the ability to contextualize information and human beings’ ability to ‘construct their own narratives and worldview’ (p. 1758). Although it is therefore
premature to worry about governing ‘strong AI’ or ‘artiﬁcial general intelligence’ (systems with cognitive abilities that fully match or exceed human
intelligence), myriad aspects and consequences of AI use in highly speciﬁc
sectors and domains might still warrant governance.
Beyond oﬀering insights into what context-speciﬁc AI governance might
entail (as discussed above), Nitzberg and Zysman emphasize that gaining
the full beneﬁts of AI use requires the deployment of the entire ‘technology
stack’ or suite of ‘intelligent tools.’ This leads them to a discussion of the
central role played by platforms, especially the dominant digital platform
ﬁrms (DPFs), in that technology stack. DPFs are crucial, they argue, because
DPFs’ dominant position in the market (and often control over other elements
of the technology stack) renders their practices de facto standards. In other
words, DPFs are able to make the rules for AI without having to consult or
bargain with other stakeholders. Nitzberg and Zysman, therefore, advocate
regulating, above all, the platform ﬁrms in order to regain a modicum of
democratic control and achieve meaningful AI governance.
Public policy can in a number of ways encourage, accelerate, nudge, constrain or even prevent technological change. To what extent it does any of
these things presumably is – at least in part and at least in democracies – a
function of the assessments of the speciﬁc technology by society or, more
precisely, by the people who constitute the democratic polity.
One way to achieve such democratic governance of AI might be to involve
the citizens in technology development and governance directly (e.g.,

1728

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

Costanza-Chock, 2020). Research on participatory and deliberative democracy suggests that it is possible to meaningfully involve citizens without
prior issue-area expertise in the governance of even quite complex issues
(Bächtiger et al., 2019; Dryzek et al., 2019; Elstub & Escobar, 2019; Fishkin,
2018; Fung & Warren, 2011), and some are therefore optimistic that modest
public ﬁnancing might suﬃce to achieve and sustain public participation in
technology governance (Büthe & Mattli, 2011, ch.9). More recent work,
however, suggests that sustaining meaningful public participation in the governance of complex, fast-changing issues (which AI technologies certainly
are) is much more challenging, even when some funding support is available
(Alshadafan, 2020, though cf. Ada Lovelace Institute 2022, forthcoming),
especially when the governance needs to be transnational or global (Grigorescu, 2015; Pauwelyn et al., 2022). The challenge also becomes apparent in
studies such as the recent study for the German Center for Trustworthy AI
by Busse and Baeva (2022), who ﬁnd that most citizens feel that they insuﬃciently understand how AI systems work.
Another way to achieve democratic governance of technologies such as AI
is to discern the preferences of citizens, then have democratic governments
act on those preferences.6 Accordingly, Sönke Ehret (2022) examines public
preferences regarding the regulation of AI, going beyond the mostly
country-speciﬁc existing literature by analyzing public preferences across a
very diverse set of ﬁve countries: Chile, China, Germany, India, and the
United Kingdom. As he points out, much (elite-driven) public debate – and
much of the existing research – has focused on opposition to, or calls for prohibitions of, the use of AI as a function of the extent to which AI conforms to,
or conﬂicts with, what are believed to be widely held societal norms regarding data privacy, explainability, etc. (see, e.g., Shin, 2021). Ehret builds on this
prior work but focuses on how these possible drivers of preferences compare
(and possibly interact) with AI-induced economic risks and opportunities as
drivers of AI governance preferences.
The analysis yields a number of intriguing ﬁndings, based on a conjoint
experiment in which respondents are asked, in each round, to compare
two algorithms with speciﬁed characteristics. Then, they (i) decide which
algorithm in each pair should be prohibited and (ii) assess each algorithm
on a 7-point scale.7 Economic considerations aﬀect these outcome variables
as we might expect: Higher risk of experiencing unemployment increases the
propensity to prohibit and lowers the assessment score for an AI algorithm,
whereas higher levels of job creation in the economy as a whole (due to
the introduction of the AI) lower the propensity to prohibit and increase
the assessment scores for the AI algorithm. These eﬀects are very consistent
across the ﬁve countries and show that economic consequences of the introduction of digital technologies are politically salient – not just as mediated by
the competition via political parties (König & Wenzelburger, 2019) but

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1729

directly: expected economic consequences drive preferences for technology
policy.
At the same time, normative considerations also matter: AI use scenarios
that entail the collection and sharing of data without the user’s ex ante knowledge and consent (thus violating privacy norms), as well as black box algorithmic decisions (where the functioning of AI is not explained or cannot
be understood, not even by outside experts) lower the approval of the AI
use. These characteristics also increase the probability that participants in
Ehret’s experiments choose a scenario for regulatory intervention (prohibiting AI use). Across all ﬁve countries, both normative and material/economic
considerations thus appear to drive public preferences, though the eﬀect
of normative considerations is greater than the eﬀect of economic considerations – but only in Germany and the UK, consistent with theories about postmaterialist values (Inglehart, 1990). When looking separately at diﬀerent
measures of compliance or violations of social norms, however, cross-national
diﬀerences no longer neatly ﬁt a pattern consistent with stereotypes: For
instance, Indian and Chinese citizens respond to violations of privacy
norms by apps involving AI almost as strongly as UK citizens, whereas such
privacy violations appear to have no eﬀect on AI policy preferences in the
OECD country Chile.
The analysis also yields a number of other intriguing ﬁndings, challenging
the conventional wisdom. For example, in Chile, China, Germany and India,
Ehret ﬁnds no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between explainability to all
vs. explainability to experts, only. This ﬁnding suggests a notable willingness
of citizens to defer to expert authority. Only in the UK does Ehret detect a
clear preference for AI use being ‘easy to explain’ (rather than being explainable only to experts).
The remaining contributions focus on speciﬁc modes and mechanisms of
AI governance. Christian Djeﬀal, Markus Siewert and Stefan Wurster (2022)
analyze governments’ national AI strategies in order to reconstruct from
them the role of states and states’ stances on their responsibility regarding
AI. They ﬁnd that states mainly fall into one of two camps: market-driven
states that rely mostly on self-regulation by AI developers and implementers
on one side, and entrepreneurial and regulatory states on the other.
Whereas Djeﬀal et al. focus on the plethora of measures to govern AI taken
by governments on behalf of states, Graeme Auld, Ashley Casovan, Amanda
Clarke, and Benjamin Faveri (2022) point out the increasingly prominent
role of non-governmental initiatives for AI governance. In light of this development, they argue that ‘AI governance cannot [anymore] be understood
through the lens of state-centric policy[-making] theories or governance
models alone’ (2022, p. 1837).

1730

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

Auld et al. note the diversity of non-governmental stakeholders active in this
issue space, as well as the broad range of AI governance issues those actors
have sought to address, but they concentrate on corporate and civil society
actors governing AI ethics (broadly conceived) through the development,
implementation, promotion, and certiﬁcation of standards for ethical AI.
Similar to private governance initiatives in many other issue areas, non-governmental governance of AI ethics initially sought to prevent or push back
against governmental governance. For companies, this ‘oppose and fend oﬀ
[governmental measures]’ approach, Auld et al. argue, oﬀered an opportunity
to minimize state intervention in business activity and to retain a high level of
autonomy. At the same time, supporting and engaging with ﬁrm- or industrylevel governance initiatives allowed the companies to reduce the risk that their
use of AI might result in reputational damage that might arise from being seen
as deviating from broadly accepted norms. For civil society organizations, this
approach (implemented in distinct, yet similarly exclusive institutions) oﬀered
an opportunity to bring pressure to bear directly on commercial targets, avoiding slow, often bureaucratic processes of governmental governance, which
might be biased against non-commercial stakeholders.
Notwithstanding the continued eﬀorts by some to keep governments at
bay, Auld et al. detect in recent years a shift toward a diﬀerent, ‘engage
and push’ approach. Rather than try to forestall state-based governance, AI
stakeholders pursuing this approach seek to feed information and speciﬁc
proposals into governmental rule-making processes, given a perceived
need to have governments develop AI rules to address inherently transnational issues at a global level (see also Büthe, 2022) and government’s
superior ability to ensure stability and a level playing ﬁeld vis-à-vis competitors. This shift from ‘oppose and fend oﬀ’ to ‘engage and push’ is important
because it implies changes in how AI should be governed and what the
respective role of the state and various private interests should be in the
process. Each approach, moreover, implies a distinct choice of governance
venue, which institutionalizes the relative power of these actors in the governance of AI and the kinds of issues to be addressed by AI governance (as
well as the mechanisms through which they are addressed).
At the same time, AI governance is still very much in ﬂux, and Auld et al.
identify several sources of instability that make continued change in AI governance arrangements likely. Auld et al., therefore, ask what AI governance
might look like in the years to come, focusing on the relationship between
governmental and private actors. To answer that question, Auld et al. draw
on the broader literature on private governance (see, e.g., Auld, 2014;
Bartley, 2018, 2021; Büthe & Mattli, 2011; Grabs et al., 2021; Green, 2014;
Vogel, 2005) to identify three ideal-typical ‘pathways’ AI governance might
take. The starting point in each case is distinct corporate and civil society
motivations. Auld et al. submit that each approach implies a distinct set of

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1731

tactics and strategies; diﬀerent kinds of interactions, and hence diﬀerent governance venues (the ﬁrst two are ‘oppose and fend oﬀ’ and ‘engage and
push’; the third approach is the ‘lead and inspire’ pathway, for which they
see little evidence in the realm of AI governance yet, but which might yet
become a possibility in light of developments in private governance in
other ﬁelds). The authors thus provide a framework for thinking about
what kind of AI governance might emerge from public-private interactions.
Seung-Hun Hong, Jonghan Lee, Sanghoon Jang, and Ha Hwang (2022) focus
on the regulation of a particular application of AI, examining how South Korea
and the UK have regulated the use of AI to enable autonomous vehicles (AVs).
This speciﬁcity allows Hong et al. to conduct a thorough comparative analysis
of numerous aspects of the regulatory environment for AI-driven AVs, consistent with our call for focusing on the speciﬁc applications of AI to fully understand the distinctive challenges that AI governance needs to address, and the
pros and cons of diﬀerent approaches to governing AI in its speciﬁc
applications.
The analysis of AV-speciﬁc AI governance, at the same time, also yields
broader insights. Disruptive innovative technologies such as AI-powered
autonomous vehicles are rapidly evolving. Their fast-changing speciﬁcs
– from details of the product design to the risks these innovations pose to
society or to speciﬁc individuals – make regulating such technologies both
necessary and diﬃcult. These diﬃculties are exacerbated, Hong et al. show,
by focusing regulatory eﬀorts on speciﬁcs such as product or algorithm
design, on rules as opposed to principles, etc. More ﬂexible regulation may
be a way to overcome these challenges and possibly even encourage (or at
least not impede) further innovation.
Yet, we lack a way to measure ‘ﬂexibility’ across the regulatory space. That
space has at least three dimensions, which Hong et al. call rule structure,
enforcement structure, and regulatory feedback, each of which has several
components. To address the lack of broadly usable measures and thus
allow systematic comparisons of ﬂexibility in the regulation or governance
of AI across countries and across the three dimensions. Hong et al. develop
an index or indicator of regulatory ﬂexibility which promises to be useful
far beyond the issue of AV-speciﬁc AI use and its governance.

The co-production of AI technology and AI governance
Reading across the articles and combining their observations with our own,
we highlight two aspects of AI governance that attest to the many ways in
which AI technologies and AI governance co-produce each other: frames
and the level of abstraction used in thinking about the key issues AI governance needs to address.

1732

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

Frames of governance: creative mirrors
Technology governance depends on assumptions, normative preferences
and stances taken towards the technology in question and towards society.
Laws, regulations and other measures to govern AI thus do not so much
reﬂect inherent characteristics or objective truths about the technology,
but reﬂect political actors’ perceptions given those actors’ predisposition –
and in the process of framing what needs to be addressed, they construct
the technology. Measures taken to govern AI are thus akin to what
Meineke, drawing on a metaphor from Goethe, called ‘schaﬀende Spiegel’
(‘creative mirrors’; Meinecke, 1948, p. 7; see also Hofmann, 2018, p. 14).
The importance of framing extends to scholarly analyses of governing AI.
Ehret (2022), for example, frames societal changes through AI in a certain way
before comparing citizens’ preferences. A variety of frames concerning what
AI actually means shows in the articles. While Nitzberg and Zysman take an
open view from a liberal democratic perspective without limiting themselves
to one frame, Auld et al. look into the development of ethical frames and
reconstruct several general stances in that regard.

Issues: general or speciﬁc AI governance?
Discussions of the key issues in AI governance, including discussions of the
ethical principles that might provide a moral compass for the governance
of AI, often take place at very high levels of abstraction. This is appropriate
insofar as fairness, justice, privacy, etc. are important issues and principles
of broad, general applicability. Even the risk of economic or political harm
from the concentrated power of platforms, emphasized by Nitzberg and
Zysman (2022; see also von Ingersleben-Seip and Georgieva, forthcoming)
is an issue that arises across a broad range of AI uses. A focus on such
general aspects, however, has consequences for the components of AI,
which technology scholars and policymakers are likely to ‘see’ and address
in AI governance.8 Approaching the issue of AI governance at a very highlevel
of abstraction pushes us toward a focus on the most general characteristics or
features of AI (and vice versa), whereas approaching AI governance on a more
speciﬁc, concrete level is likely to result in a focus on the diﬀerentiated governance issues concerning speciﬁc AI applications.

Herding cats?
Science and Technology Studies have highlighted the crucial importance of
governance for societal shaping and making of technology. Accordingly,
the democratic ideal of AI governance should give all who are aﬀected by
the introduction of AI – and possibly also those who in the absence of AI

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1733

might miss out on important opportunities for improved well-being – a
chance to shape the trajectory of AI technology development.9
AI governance, however, is enormously challenging because AI is a rapidly
changing, new technology. Such moving targets are a tremendous challenge
for public, democratic governance even under otherwise conducive circumstances (Abbott & Snidal, 2009; Fenwick et al., 2017; Vincent et al., 2015).
Yet, AI is not just a moving target. Governing AI is an attempt to govern a
technology that is fundamentally geared toward learning and adapting, on
its own, at speeds that increasingly exceed human capacity to do so. Governing AI therefore is – and surely will increasingly become – akin to herding cats:
If autonomous learning is a deﬁning (even if still quite limited) characteristic
of AI, then governing AI is an attempt to regulate something with a (more or
less prominent) mind of its own.
Therefore, in lieu of drawing ﬁrm conclusions from the research presented
in this special issue, we do something only slightly less risky: oﬀer a sketch of
a research and policy agenda for AI governance beyond what is covered in
this special issue.10

In Lieu of a conclusion: an AI governance research agenda
In-Explainable AI?
Machine learning was not conceived to be readily understood by average citizens. In more recent years, researchers have consciously tried to reconceptualize this aspect of AI by developing the notion of ‘Explainable AI’ (e.g.,
Gunning et al., 2021; Samek et al., 2019). The literature on AI and its governance now often advocates Explainable AI as the panacea for both public
acceptance and technology development in the public interest. Explainable
AI narrowly conceived might merely mean that it can in principle be
explained how the AI algorithm works – maybe even in ways and in language
comprehensible to a lay audience (see Ehret’s distinction between ‘easy to
explain’ and ‘only experts can understand ’; see also König et al., 2022).
Indeed, recent research suggests that it is possible, post hoc, to reconstruct
how an AI system arrived at its recommendations, decisions, or other outcomes it generated (Mertes et al., 2022; Molnar, 2022; Weitz et al., 2019),
though such an ex post reconstruction requires great eﬀort and comes at a
considerable costs – and hence is only rarely undertaken.11
Often, however, ‘Explainable AI’ seems to carry much more demanding
connotations, suggesting that we can understand how a particular AI algorithm works in such a way that the recommendations or decisions resulting
from the use of that algorithm become predictable. Unfortunately, this idea
is misleading. Many AI algorithms ‘search’ for a solution in various, nonlinear ways, such that it is not guaranteed that they will arrive at the same

1734

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

result every time. Moreover, AI is powerful as a (self)learning system precisely
because (or when) it continuously takes new information into account, which
means that very small changes to the data may prompt it to give a diﬀerent
answer to the same question (see, e.g., de Marchi et al., 2004, p. 372f).
Sometimes ‘Explainable AI’ is understood to go even further, namely to
allow a human being to follow along and review the AI-based decisionmaking in real time and then approve or reject the AI-generated recommendation
not just based on human intuition or in comparison with alternative courses
of action or choices suggested by alternative solution methods (such as
linear, matrix algebra- or calculus-based optimization) but based on having
understood and followed each step in the AI-based decisionmaking in
every case. Expecting or even demanding, as part of an AI governance framework, such a real-time human review before any AI-based recommendation is
put to use, would undermine key beneﬁts of using AI. AI may be far from
being able to perform at the level of human cognition and emotional intelligence. But the speed with which computers are able to manage, process, and
analyze massive quantities of data now exceeds the human capacity to take
these steps, and computational power seems virtually guaranteed to continue to increase. Demanding that the operation of AI ‘slow down’ so
people can follow along in each case of its use defeats the purpose of
using AI.12
Fortunately, the expansive (unrealistic) view of Explainable AI may not be a
prerequisite for legitimate and responsible AI. As Mann (1993) pointed out,
there are many aspects of modern life – including seemingly mundane
aspects, such as our fresh water supply, garbage collection and disposal,
and mail delivery – where non-expert citizens usually do not fully understand
how they work. We simply accept that they (appear) to work, and we delegate
to the ‘experts’ the task of ﬁguring out the details (combined with some kind
of accountability mechanism to deal with evidence to the contrary, should
such evidence arise). It is conceivable that AI use will at some point be
viewed very similarly, but much more research is needed to identify the conditions under which such delegation may be acceptable to citizens and under
what conditions it yields good results.

Ethics & governance
As noted in the introduction, AI raises new, distinct governance challenges, as
well as familiar governance challenges in arguably novel ways (see also
Djeﬀal, 2020). It has long been the case, for instance, that states ﬁnd it
diﬃcult to predict problems within society and formulate adequate regulations ex ante (Eisenberg, 1992). This has become ever more apparent
since the speed of innovation has increased exponentially since the last
century (Owen et al., 2013), albeit in diverse, complex ways (Breznitz, 2020).

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1735

AI has further exacerbated this dilemma for policymakers and others seeing
public governance as the most appropriate way to address those problems.13
Moreover, as a consequence of the issues sketched above – such as the rapid
changes in AI technology, the massive diversiﬁcation of AI applications, and
even the co-constitution of AI technology and AI governance – many important aspects of AI are not (or insuﬃciently) addressed by law or other forms of
public governance (Bureau & Dieuaide, 2018). Therefore, to ensure that AI is
researched, developed and implemented in a way that serves – rather than
decreases – the good of society, it is ever more important to consider AI
ethics and AI governance simultaneously.
Companies, research institutions and public sector bodies have started to
develop a wealth of principles and guidelines for ethical AI. European initiatives include the European Commission’s (2020) White Paper on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, which highlights steps to achieve an ‘ecosystem of excellence and
trust,’ and AI4People’s core principles for AI usage (Floridi et al., 2018).
They also include AI4People’s proposal concerning 14 priority actions,
models of AI governance, and regulatory toolboxes (Pagallo et al., 2019) –
as well as the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI issued by the High-level
Expert Group on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2019). Identifying a set of core
values and principles that should guide the development of AI, however, is
not just a concern in Europe or the Global North. Global eﬀorts include the
AI principles developed by the OECD (2019), as well as the IEEE’s (2019)
ethical considerations in the design of autonomous and intelligent systems.14
Overall, there seems to be a near-global consensus on ﬁve key ethical principles, namely: transparency, justice and fairness, non-maleﬁcence, responsibility and privacy (Jobin et al., 2019). All of these principles and guidelines are
important for laying down the ethical foundation and for providing a moral
compass on how to proceed and what to consider in the development of AI,
especially when the exact impacts of particular AI applications are not predictable, and consequently, concrete laws have not been formulated yet. Despite
their high level of abstraction, such ethical principles can guide AI implementation in industrial engineering (see, e.g., Unruh et al., 2022). At the same time,
with few exceptions (such as Google, Microsoft and Daimler), major AI users
and developers have so far only made vague commitments regarding AI
ethics (Lütge, 2020). And startups are even more unlikely to integrate ethical
AI principles unless they are obliged to do so due to data-sharing relationships
with high-tech ﬁrms (Bessen et al., 2022) – not because startups are less committed to the common good or ethical principles than established ﬁrms, but
because their focus on short-term survival makes it diﬃcult to pursue objectives where the rewards are long-term.15
To close the gap between abstract AI principles and concrete guidance for
practical action, it is now urgent to build on AI ethics to develop more practical,
concrete, use-case – speciﬁc recommendations and regulations, especially in

1736

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

those ﬁelds of AI applications that are relatively ﬁrmly established. For
example, in the automotive sector, policymakers need to swiftly develop a
regulatory framework that, inter alia, clariﬁes what constitutes legitimate override functions or harmonizes the deﬁnition of a ‘safe condition’ for AVs (Lütge
et al., 2021). Such binding regulations are often even welcomed by the private
sector (consistent with Auld et al.’s observation of a shift away from wanting to
prevent government rule-making) because they remove uncertainty about
what is permitted and what restrictions must be considered, so that instead
of spending time on self-regulation, manufacturers can focus their attention
on development and production.
At the same time, a ‘one size ﬁts all’ approach will not be suﬃcient. What is
needed are tailored (diﬀerentiated) regulatory eﬀorts for the many diﬀerent
AI applications. In developing those regulations, a starting point could be
to ‘[…] deﬁne criteria for distinguishing between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ rules’
(Lütge, 2020, p. 6). ‘Hard rules’ (i.e., laws and regulations) might pertain to
critical decisions and AI applications, whereas other AI applications would
require only ‘soft rules’ such as ethics codes. To facilitate such a distinction,
Germany’s Data Ethics Commission (2019) has developed a ‘criticality
pyramid,’ which ranges from AI applications with no potential for harm to
applications with an untenable potential for harm.
The overarching goal of all of these measures should be to ensure socially
responsible adoption of AI but, at the same time, prevent the creation of
additional barriers to socially beneﬁcial innovation. Instead of considering
them separately, we propose acknowledging that AI ethics and AI governance go hand in hand; overarching ethical principles and core values are
essential to adapting existing legal frameworks accordingly.

System eﬀects in human–machine interactions
One of the most promising uses of AI is in decision-support systems (see, e.g.,
Campanella et al., 2016; He et al., 2019). Recent research also suggests that
most people view AI much more favorably when it is employed such that it
provides no more than suggestions, i.e., when the ultimate decision (and
responsibility) still rests with a person. There is a risk, however, that those
decisionmakers will then overly rely upon the AI support system. This may
happen for a number of reasons, including an unreﬂected pursuit of
eﬃciency gains made possible by AI. Most important, however, may be the
risk of what Robert Jervis (1997), drawing on behavioral research in psychology and related ﬁelds, called ‘system eﬀects’.16 The seeming certainty with
which AI systems tend to present a recommendation (appearing to take
most other options ‘oﬀ the table’) is likely to feed the assumption that the
supercomputer – which provides the recommendation at breakneck speed,
taking into account unimaginably large amounts of information – has

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1737

surely considered all relevant aspects. The resulting conscious or subconscious expectation that the risk of making a mistake has declined tends, in
turn, to make human agents more risk-acceptant than they otherwise
would be (see also Leicht-Deobald et al., 2019, pp. 384–386). Figuring out
how to avoid such harmful system eﬀects will be an important contribution
to eﬀective AI governance.

AI in international politics
An AI application might yield quite diﬀerent results in diﬀerent contexts
when the algorithm has been ‘trained’ on culturally speciﬁc data. Attempts
to establish national ‘sovereignty’ over many kinds of data may therefore
unintentionally result in a more fragmented digital world. And censorship
or similar forms of government restrictions on cross-border information
exchange (Milner, 2006; Flonk, 2021) may intentionally heighten fragmentation by prompting the same AI to yield diﬀerent results in diﬀerent political
contexts. Speciﬁc AI applications may, moreover, have a language- or culturally speciﬁc interface. The algorithmic code at the heart of AI, however,
moves readily across borders – akin to other digital goods and services
(Büthe, 2022). In the absence of political interference, AI might
therefore spread rapidly once the advantages of speciﬁc AI applications
become apparent
(Drezner, 2019; Milner & Solstad, 2021), and it
may aﬀect domestic political and economic structures along the way, as
other transformative technologies have done in the past (Hintze, 1975
(1906)).
While the general dynamics might be familiar from previous cases in which
disruptive technologies were introduced into international politics, the
speciﬁcs of how AI is likely to change international politics have only just
started to attract serious scholarly attention (Allen, 2022; Chen, 2022;
Cheng & Zeng, 2022; Ding & Dafoe, 2021; Kerry et al., 2021; Meltzer, 2021;
Meltzer & Tielemans, 2022; Siegmann & Anderljung, 2022; Von IngerslebenSeip, 2022). The development of autonomous weapons systems, which
might circumvent defensive structures and technologies, possibly shifting
the oﬀense-defense balance in militarized disputes, is a prominent possibility
(e.g., Gill, 2019). AI might also change international politics indirectly, for
instance via its eﬀect on economic growth. Bughin et al., estimate that AI
could deliver additional economic output of US$13 trillion by 2030, but
these beneﬁts will be distributed very unevenly, with most of the gains accruing to developed countries.17 At the same time, AI-enabled capabilities may
allow rising powers to challenge the traditionally dominant powers (Roberts
et al., 2021). More research is needed to understand these and other possible
channels through which AI may transform international politics.

1738

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

AI is also prompting changes in the patterns of competition and
cooperation. Technical experts from countries across the world, including
from geopolitical rivals, such as the United States and China, are collaborating
on technical standards for AI within transnational standard-setting organizations. Governments, however, are much less willing to cooperate and
enter into global agreements to govern AI. The lack of inter-governmental
cooperation is particularly striking with respect to the ethics of AI (von Ingersleben-Seip, 2022). Even the UNESCO agreement on the Ethics of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, adopted by UNESCO members in 2021 and touted as the ‘ﬁrst
ever global agreement on AI ethics,”18 is not truly global, as the United
States is not a signatory of the agreement. Given that one of the world’s
major AI powers has not signed up to the UNESCO guidelines, their impact
has been limited so far. On a domestic level, many countries have taken
steps toward technological sovereignty, reducing their dependence on geopolitical rivals. For example, in light of Chinese-American trade frictions, China
has increased its investments into the AI infrastructure layer centered on AI
chips, computing power and data platforms in order to be less dependent
on American technologies (Ding, 2022).
The inherently transnational nature of AI technology implies that its governance might also need to take place, at least in part, at the inter- or transnational level. While this need has been recognized in some international
fora, such the OECD, public, governmental governance of AI tends to be so
far focused very much at the national level, as shown by Djeﬀal et al.
(2022). And the partial but substantial breakdown in inter-state cooperation
in the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic suggests that a grave crisis
might be needed to prompt international cooperation on a broad scale
with simultaneous serious depth (Bremmer, 2022). Non-governmental initiatives have gone much further in moving AI governance to the transnational
level, as noted by Auld et al. (2022), but it is at best an open question
whether substantial inter- or transnational AI governance can be achieved
without governments as parties and enforcers of any agreement. And
given that countries’ goals with regard to the development and use of AI
vary widely, it is currently hard to imagine that there will be meaningful international agreements for the governance of AI beyond relatively small subsets
of countries. This absence of genuinely global governance is fueled by
intense cyber rivalries that risk splintering the digital world into two blocks
(United States vs. China) or perhaps even three (United States vs. Europe
vs. China). If the digital world in fact ends up splitting into two (or three)
diﬀerent blocks, the question is whether these blocks will be rigidly separated
or interoperable (Zysman & Nitzberg, 2020, p. 21). One potential outcome is
that the two (or three) blocks will have a shared technical infrastructure layer
but widely divergent application and content layers.19 In sum, research on the

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1739

promise and limits of intergovernmental cooperation on AI governance – and
the conditions under which it can be achieved – is greatly needed.

Risks and opportunities
AI, as a special case of the broader phenomenon of digitalization, has wideranging transformative potential (Maasen & Sutter, 2020, pp. 84ﬀ; Zysman &
Newman, 2006). Among the consequences is an increase in several kinds of
risks: AI increases cyber security risks, may bring radical changes in the workplace, and enables ‘deep fakes’, as well as new threats from autonomous
weapons.20 These risks must be taken seriously.
At the same time, many AI applications hold tremendous promise for
improving our quality of life, reducing risks, and enabling qualitative leaps
in factor productivity and hence economic growth, with simultaneous
reductions in environmental harm. Depriving citizens of those beneﬁts (by
preventing or substantially delaying the development of AI technology)
has detrimental consequences that might be equally or more severe than
the detrimental consequences that citizens or policymakers might seek to
forestall by inhibiting or preventing the technology. The losses caused by preventing the introduction or development of the technology are, however,
often invisible because the social, economic and health beneﬁts of a technology often do not become fully apparent until quite far into the development
of any given new technology (Fenwick et al., 2017).
Moreover, even within a single issue area, AI itself can play out very diﬀerently. For instance, AI is the basis of systems of surveillance that resemble the
worst nightmares of privacy scholars and activists. At the same time, many
privacy-enhancing technologies are based on AI technologies. This duality
underscores the need to consider AI both a risk and an opportunity for
social values. And such duality, can be found with regard to multiple social
values such as opacity and transparency, discrimination and equality, as well
as environmental sustainability and pollution. Interestingly, disadvantaged
groups most immediately aﬀected by a technological innovation may focus
to a much greater extent on the beneﬁts than the average citizen or voter,
as Schönmann et al. (2022) have shown regarding assessments of care
robots: People who depend upon extensive care and support in their daily
lives show much greater awareness of the potential upsides of care robots
than the general population. As technical and social AI innovations continue,
it becomes ever more important to govern such novel technologies in ways
that prevent harm and contain risks without depriving people of beneﬁts
and foreclosing opportunities for improving wellbeing.
The challenge is exacerbated by public discourses that are, especially in
the realm of European public policy, often dominated by a focus on downside
risks of change and on prohibitions. Identifying ways to elevate public

1740

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

discourse so as to take both the risks and the opportunities seriously would
be a very important contribution to both scholarship and practice of the
regulation and governance of AI.

Governing not the technology but its (ab)uses
The articles in this special issue focus mostly on governing AI as a technology.
This focus is in keeping with the dominant approach to technology governance, even in light of sophisticated inquiries into whether technologies and
technical artifacts have ‘agency’ or ‘politics’ (Latour, 2007; Winner, 1980).
Yet, it is not the only way to address the issues raised by AI.
An alternative approach might focus on how human beings and organizations concretely use AI. The primary goal of AI governance, after all, is not to
steer the development of the technology as such, but to avoid bad and
achieve better outcomes or consequences of particular uses of AI. Healthrelated data, for instance, is in many countries seen as particularly sensitive.
AI-based analyses of such data can be used to estimate personalized risk
proﬁles, which might then be used to deny higher-risk individuals employment,
health insurance, or other beneﬁts. Consequently, health and medical data
tends to be subject to some of the strongest privacy and data security requirements. Gathering such data, combining it with other data, and analyzing health
and medical data is therefore in many countries highly restricted or even prohibited. Such regulation of the technology, however, also inhibits advances in personalized medicine, delays progress in ﬁnding treatments for rare diseases, and
prevents the early detection of, and eﬀective policy responses to, population
health risks and threats, such as epidemics and pandemics. It might therefore
be much better, from a public interest perspective, to loosen restrictions on
the data and the tools for its analysis and focus instead on prohibiting the
denial of insurance coverage on health grounds (maybe complemented by
public subsidies for high-risk insured persons), health-based employment discrimination, and other abuses – and vigorously enforcing such prohibitions.
Future research might hence focus on ways of governing the use and punishing the abuse of AI, rather than governing its primarily technical aspects.
While surely not without its own challenges, this approach also might oﬀer
a fruitful way to deal with the unpredictability, the rapid changes, and the
technical complexity of AI while reducing the need to restrict its technological development.

Notes
1. For instance, the April 2021 proposal for an EU Regulation commonly known as
"the AI Act," speciﬁes a number of rights and obligations for individuals and
groups vis-a-vis the developers and users of AI applications and systems,

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1741

conditional on the risk categorization of the AI systems – and on what constitutes an ‘AI system’ (deﬁned in Arts. 4–6 and Art.3, respectively, and their
annexes). German works council representatives report eﬀorts by employer
associations to narrow the deﬁnition of AI in the draft legislation in such a
way that employers’ transparency obligations and employees’ participation
rights regarding the AI are limited to the machine learning components and
do not apply to the rest of the algorithms, nor to any other parts of the technology stack, in which these components are embedded. How AI is deﬁned thus
matters for human resource management, including performance monitoring
and evaluation, as well as hiring, promotion, and termination (not-for-attribution in-person and email communications by Tim Büthe with German works
council representatives, Munich, August/September 2022).
2. One of the authors later reported that they chose the term to "get away from
studying human behavior and to consider the computer as a tool for solving
certain classes of problems" (McCarthy, 1989, p. 6).
3. Key to the autonomous or "intelligent" capabilities of such systems (see, e.g.,
Corea, 2019) are computational methods that allow for improvements in the
ability to achieve the speciﬁed objective, which may occur via human-controlled ("supervised") or even entirely automated ("unsupervised") feedback
into the algorithmic processing. Such improvements are often called
"machine learning," which uses neuro-biologically inspired computational
architectures, such as neural networks, to achieve ever better recognition of
patterns in data, including clusters, sparseness, and linear and non-linear correlations across time and space (see, e.g., Bishop, 2006; for an early discussion of
possible uses (and limitations) in Political Science and International Relations,
see Beck et al., 2000; de Marchi et al., 2004).
4. For the European OECD member states, these eﬀorts are examined in detail in
the essay by Djeﬀal et al. (2022).
5. For a broader discussion of transnational, mostly non-governmental eﬀorts, see
the essay by Auld et al. (2022).
6. This approach reﬂects the liberal tradition (Moravcsik, 1997). For a compelling
treatment, problematizing the liberal tradition beyond what we can cover in
this essay, see Katznelson (1996).
7. Generalizability may be limited by the modest sample size and the non-random
opt-in sampling, though cross-country comparability appears to be retained, as
the country-level sub-samples are non-representative in similar ways (e.g., due
to the over-representation of younger, highly educated participants).
8. The issue raised here is not just an issue for public policy: Lütge (2019) points
out that companies and other stakeholder ﬁnd it diﬃcult to meaningfully
adopt and actually implement principles at such a high level of abstraction
into their business practices.
9. We recognize, of course, that the use and governance of AI are by no means just
undertaken by democratic states and societies (see Horowitz, 2016; Feldstein,
2019; Gravett, 2020).
10. Our ability to oﬀer ﬁrm conclusions is also limited by the diversity of substantive
foci, approaches, and methods in this special issue. To advance the social-scientiﬁc understanding of AI, we have brought together papers that examine distinctive challenges and opportunities in the governance of AI from a variety
of perspectives, focused on political and public policy aspects of the topic.
The articles in the special issue also use a variety of approaches and

1742

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

methods; they look at diﬀerent instruments and other aspects of governance
such as public attitudes, national strategies, ethical standards, as well as
public and private regulation. The tremendous diversity enriches the special
issue. At the same time, given that the articles all diﬀer from each other in substantive focus, as well as theoretical approach, methods, etc., we cannot oﬀer a
comparative ﬁnal analysis of the pros and cons of focusing governance eﬀorts
on diﬀerent governance mechanisms, nor a conclusive discussion of tradeoﬀs
(e.g., between regulatory ﬂexibility and standardization) or a synthesis of big
policy implications.
11. Conceptualized in this way, Explainable AI may be akin to a stress test, conducted on a small sample as part of quality control – though cf. Bryson and
Winﬁeld’s proposal that, when AI-driven systems, such as care robots, act in
unexpected ways, users ’should be able to ask it “Why did you just do that?”
and receive an intelligible reply’ (2017, p. 119).
12. Tim Büthe thanks Johannes Fottner, Charlotte Unruh and Charlotte Haid for fruitful
discussions on this issue. Note that this is a distinct issue from the ‘slow AI’ movement’s concern with the speed of (and priorities in) technology development
rather than technology application or operation; see Auld et al. (2022, p. 1833).
13. We do not suggest that private governance is inherently unproblematic or
necessarily more eﬃcient or eﬀective, just that the problems are diﬀerent
(see, e.g., Balleisen, 2009; Mosley, 2009; Büthe, 2013; Schleifer et al., 2019;
Grabs et al., 2021; Kinniburgh et al., 2022, forthcoming), and the literature on
regulation and governance has historically mostly focused on state regulation
and public governance.
14. Although these eﬀorts are in principle global, stakeholders from the Global
North have been much more vocal and visible, at least in the discourses conducted and published in Western languages. As Auld et al. (2022, pp. 1835–
1838) point out, such preeminence of stakeholders from certain regions of
the world can lead to “localization eﬀects,” which undermine the output legitimacy of governance eﬀorts when the distinctive concerns of other regions are
not appropriately addressed (see also DeMenno and Büthe’s discussion of the
“political information”-based policy learning channel for exerting inﬂuence
over governance agendas and outcomes (2022, esp. pp. 61–63).
15. Data sharing agreements might incentivize more ethical AI, but at a cost: they
force startups to share valuable information with these ﬁrms and therefore
potentially reduce market competition.
16. Jervis provides a compelling example in his introduction (1997, pp. 7f, drawing
in part on C. Perrow’s Normal Accidents): After the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster
in Alaska in 1989, the U.S. government required new oil tankers that were going
to use U.S. ports to be double-hulled. Having invested in the more expensive
vessels, shipping companies and/or captains used the extra protection
aﬀorded by the double hulls to go faster and take greater chances, thus
mostly eliminating the hoped-for environmental beneﬁts.
17. A notable exception to the projected pattern is China, which has been investing
heavily into becoming a global leader in the AI supply chain (Bughin et al., 2018,
pp.3f) – though note that Chinese private AI investments declined during the
COVID pandemic in 2019 and 2020 (Ding, 2022), and many economically disadvantaged Chinese provinces may not be on track to meet the ambitious goals
set by the central government for the growth of their respective AI industries
(Hine & Floridi, 2022, forthcoming).

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1743

18. See https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/unesco-member-states-adopt-ﬁrst-eve
r-global-agreement-ethics-artiﬁcial-intelligence. Emphasis added.
19. We thank Andrea Renda for pointing out this scenario.
20. For a recent overview, see Bartneck et al. (2021).

Acknowledgements
We thank all the authors who have submitted papers for this special issue; the numerous reviewers who through their vigorous yet constructive criticisms have pushed us all
to improve the papers; the presenters, discussants, and numerous active participants of
the Workshop ‘Governing New Technologies: Technological Innovations, Market Competition and Public Policy,’ held at the TUM Akademiezentrum Raitenhaslach, 10–12
February 2020, jointly organized by Zlatina Georgieva, Nora von Ingersleben-Seip and
Tim Büthe with TUM School of Management Professor for the Economics of Innovation,
Prof. Dr. Hanna Hottenrott. Some of the ideas set out in the concluding section of this
essay were ﬁrst developed and/or tested out in the context of discussions of the EU
H2020-Project ‘TRends In Global Governance and Europe’s Role’ (TRIGGER), the Brookings-CEPS-led transatlantic Dialogue on AI, and/or the ‘Human Preference-Aware
Optimization’ project, led by Tim Büthe with Prof. Dr. Johannes Fottner and funded
by the Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence. We are also grateful to Graeme Auld and
John Zysman for helpful comments on previous drafts and the editors-in-chief of
JEPP, Berthold Rittberger and Jeremy Richardson, for their support of the project.

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Funding
We are grateful for ﬁnancial support from the Hochschule für Politik München at the
Technical University of Munich, TUM (Chair for International Relations, Prof. Dr. Tim
Büthe) and the TUM Raitenhaslach Fund.

Notes on Contributors
Tim Büthe is Professor and Chair for International Relations, Hochschule für
Politik München (Munich School of Politics and Public Policy) at the Technical University of Munich (Germany) and the TUM School of Management. He also is Technology Policy Scholar at the Sanford School of Public Policy, Duke University. Most
of the work on this special issue was done while he was also a Senior Fellow of the
Kenan Institute for Ethics, Duke University (USA). He serves as the corresponding
editor for this special issue and corresponding author for this introductory essay.
Christian Djeﬀal is Assistant Professor for Law, Science and Technology at the Technical University of Munich (Germany).
Christoph Lütge is Professor and Chair for Business Ethics, as well as the founding
director of the Institute for Ethics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence at the Technical University
of Munich (Germany).

1744

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

Sabine Maasen is Professor and Chair for Science Studies and Innovation Research at
the University of Hamburg (Germany). Her work on this special issue was begun while
she was Professor and Chair for Sociology of Science at the Technical University of
Munich and director of the Munich Center for Technology in Society (MCTS) at TUM.
Nora von Ingersleben-Seip is a Doctoral Candidate at the Chair for International
Relations at the Hochschule für Politik/TUM School of Social Sciences and Technology.
Most of her work on this special issue was conducted while she was a Researcher for
the EU H2020 TRIGGER project.

ORCID
Tim Büthe
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4724-5000
Christian Djeﬀal
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2098-7239
Christoph Lütge
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3870-4789
Nora von Ingersleben-Seip
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3708-4757

References
Abbott, K. W., & Snidal, D. (2009). The governance triangle. In W. Mattli & N. Woods
(Eds.), The politics of global regulation (pp. 44–88). Princeton University Press.
Ada Lovelace Institute. (2022, forthcoming). Inclusive AI governance: Civil society participation in standards development.
Allen, G. C. (2022). One key challenge for diplomacy on AI? China’s military does not want
to talk. Commentary from the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Alshadafan, A. (2020). Energy eﬃciency standards: The struggle for legitimacy.
International Journal of Standardization Research, 18(1), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.
4018/IJSR.20200101.oa1
Armstrong, S., Bostrom, B., & Shulman, C. (2016). Racing to the precipice: A model of
artiﬁcial intelligence development. AI & Society, 31(2), 201–206. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00146-015-0590-y
Armstrong, S., & Pamlin, D. (2015). 12 Risks that threaten human civilization. Global
Challenges Foundation. Retrieved September 10, 2022, from https://www.pamlin.
net/material/2017/10/10/without-us-progress-still-possible-article-in-china-dailym9hnk.
Auld, G. (2014). Constructing private governance: The rise and evolution of forest, coﬀee,
and ﬁsheries certiﬁcation. Yale University Press.
Auld, G., Casovan, A., Clarke, A., & Faveri, B. (2022). Governing AI through ethical standards: Learning from the experience of other private governance initiatives. Journal
of European Public Policy, 29(11). https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.2099449
Babcock, J., Kramar, J., & Yampolskiy, R. V. (2019). Guidelines for artiﬁcial intelligence
containment. In A. E. Abbas (Ed.), Next-generation ethics (pp. 90–112). Cambridge
University Press.
Bächtiger, A., Dryzek, J. S., & Mansbridge, J. (2019). Oxford handbook of deliberative
democracy. Oxford University Press.
Balleisen, E. J. (2009). Private cops on the fraud beat: American business self-regulation
and its discontents, 1895-1932. Business History Review, 83(1), 113–160. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0007680500000222
Bartley, T. (2018). Rules without rights: Land, labor, and private authority in the global
economy. Oxford University Press.

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1745

Bartley, T. (2021). Power and the practice of transnational private regulation. New
Political Economy, 27(2), 188–202. https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2021.1881471
Bartneck, C., Lütge, C., Wagner, A., & Welsh, S. (2021). An introduction to ethics in
robotics and AI. Springer.
Beck, N., King, G., & Zeng, L. (2000). Improving quantitative studies of international
conﬂict: A conjecture. American Political Science Review, 94(1), 21–36. https://doi.
org/10.2307/2586378
Bessen, J., Impink, S. M., & Seamans, R. (2022). The cost of ethical AI development for AI
startups. Proceedings of 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Ethics,
and Society (Oxford, UK), 92–106. https://doi.org/10.1145/3514094.3534195
Bishop, C. M. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning. Springer.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, dangers, strategies. Oxford University Press.
Bremmer, I. (2022). The power of crisis: How three threats – and our response – will
change the world. Simon and Schuster.
Breznitz, D. (2020). Innovation in real places: Strategies for prosperity in an unforgiving
world. Oxford University Press.
Bryson, J., & Theodorou, A. (2019). How society can maintain human-centric artiﬁcial
intelligence. In M. Toivonen & E. Saari (Eds.), Human-centered digitalization and services: Translational systems sciences (Vol. 19; pp. 305–323). Springer.
Bryson, J., & Winﬁeld, A. (2017). Standardizing ethical design for artiﬁcial intelligence
and autonomous systems. Computer 50(5), 116–119. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.
2017.154
Bughin, J., Seong, J., Manyika, J., Chui, M., & Joshi, R. (2018). Notes from the AI frontier:
Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy. McKinsey Global Institute
Discussion Paper.
Bureau, M. C., & Dieuaide, P. (2018). Institutional change and transformations in labour
and employment standards: An analysis of ‘grey zones’. Transfer: European Review of
Labour and Research, 24(3), 261–277. https://doi.org/10.1177/1024258918775573
Busse, F., & Baeva, G. (2022). Was sind die richtigen Zutaten für vertrauenswürdige
Künstliche
Intelligenz?
Ergebnisse
der
ZVKI-Online-Befragung:
Wissen,
Nachvollziehbarkeit und bewertbare Erfahrungen – Zutaten für vertrauenswürdige
Künstliche Intelligenz (KI).
Büthe, T. (2013). Distributional consequences of transnational private regulation: institutional complementarity as a structural source of power in global product and
ﬁnancial markets. Duke University Rethinking Regulation Working Paper
no.6. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2238100
Büthe, T. (2022). De-Globalisierung in der Standardisierung und Governance digitaler
Technologien? In S. A. Schirm, A. Busch, S. Lütz, S. Walter, & H. Zimmermann (Eds.),
De-Globalisierung: Forschungsstand und Perspektiven (pp. 279–301). Nomos
Verlag. https://doi.org/10.5771/9783748932901-279
Büthe, T., & Mattli, W. (2011). The new global rulers: The privatization of regulation in the
world economy. Princeton University Press.
Campanella, P., Lovato, E., Maronoe, C., Fallacara, L., Mancuso, A., Ricciardi, W., &
Specchia, M. L. (2016). The impact of electronic health records on healthcare
quality: A systematic review and meta-analysis. European Journal of Public Health,
26(1), 60–64.
Chen, J. (2022). Cyber and inﬂuence operations. In W. C. Hannas & H. Cheng (Eds.),
Chinese power and artiﬁcial intelligence: Perspectives and challenges (pp. 189–215).
Routledge.

1746

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

Cheng, J., & Zeng, J. (2022). Shaping AI’s future? China in global AI governance. Journal
of Contemporary China, 31(137), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/10670564.2022.
2107391
Christou, G., & Simpson, S. (2011). The European union, multilateralism, and the global
governance of the internet. Journal of European Public Policy, 18(2), 241–257.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2011.544505
Collier, D., & Mahon, J. E. (1993). Conceptual ’stretching’ revisited: Adapting categories
in comparative analysis. American Political Science Review, 87(4), 845–855. https://
doi.org/10.2307/2938818
Corea, F. (2019). An introduction to data: Everything you need to know about ai, big data
and data science. Springer.
Costanza-Chock, S. (2020). Design justice: Community-led practices to build the worlds
we need. MIT Press.
Crafts, N. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence as a general-purpose technology: An historical
perspective. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 37(3), 521–536. https://doi.org/10.
1093/oxrep/grab012
Datenethikkommission
der
Bundesregierung.
(2019).
Gutachten
der
Datenethikkommission. https://datenethikkommission.de/wp-content/uploads/19
1128_DEK_Gutachten_bf_b.pdf.
de Marchi, S., Gelpi, C., & Grynaviski, J. D. (2004). Untangeling neural nets. American
Political Science Review, 98(2), 371–378. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055404001200
DeMenno, M. B., & Büthe, T. (2022). Voice and inﬂuence in global governance: An
analytical framework. In J. Pauwelyn, M. Maggetti, T. Büthe, & A. Berman (Eds.),
Rethinking participation in global governance: Voice and inﬂuence after stakeholder
reforms in global ﬁnance and health (pp. 31–70). Oxford University Press.
Ding, J. (2022). Feature translation: China AI venture capital data report (IT Juzi). ChinAI
Newsletter #191.
Ding, J., & Dafoe, A. (2021). The logic of strategic assets: From oil to AI. Security Studies,
30(2), 182–212. https://doi.org/10.1080/09636412.2021.1915583
DiNuovo, A. (2018, November 28). Here’s how robots can ﬁght loneliness and ageing.
World Economic Forum in Focus. Retrieved September 10, 2022, from https://www.
weforum.org/agenda/2018/11/robot-carers-could-help-lonely-seniors-they-re-ch
eering-humans-up-already.
Djeﬀal, C. (2019). AI, democracy, and the law. In A. Sudmann (Ed.), The democratization
of artiﬁcial intelligence. Net politics in the era of learning algorithms (pp. 255–284).
Transcript.
Djeﬀal, C. (2020). Artiﬁcial intelligence and public governance. Normative guidelines for
artiﬁcial intelligence in government and public administration. In T. Wischmeyer & T.
Rademacher (Eds.), Regulating artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 277–293). Springer.
Djeﬀal, C., Siewert, M. B., & Wurster, S. (2022). Role of the state and responsibility in
governing artiﬁcial intelligence: A comparative analysis of AI strategies. Journal of
European Public Policy, 29(11). https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.2094987
Drezner, D. W. (2019). Technological change and international relations. International
Relations, 33(2), 286–303. https://doi.org/10.1177/0047117819834629
Dryzek, J. S., Bächtiger, A., Chambers, S., Cohen, J., Druckman, J. N., Felicetti, A., Fishkin,
J. S., Farrell, D. M., Fung, A., Gutmann, A., Landemore, H., Mansbridge, J., Marien, S.,
Neblo, M. A., Niemeyer, S., Setälä, M., Slothuus, R., Suiter, J., Thompson, D., & Warren,
M. E. (2019). The crisis of democracy and the science of deliberation: Citizens can
avoid polarization and make sound decisions. Science, 363(6432), 1144–1146.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw2694

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1747

Ehret, S. (2022). Public preferences for governing AI technology: Comparative
Evidence. Journal of European Public Policy, 29(11), 1779–1798. https://doi.org/10.
1080/13501763.2022.2094988
Eisenberg, J. A. (1992). The limits of reason. Transaction Publishers.
Elstub, S., & Escobar, O. (2019). Handbook of democratic innovation and governance.
Edward Elgar.
European Commission. (2018). European Commission digital strategy: A digitally transformed, user-focused and data-driven commission (C(2018) 7118 ﬁnal).
European Commission. (2020). On artiﬁcial intelligence – A European approach to excellence and trust. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/ﬁles/commission-white-paperartiﬁcial-intelligence-feb2020_en.pdf.
European Commission. (2021). Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of
the council laying down harmonised rules on artiﬁcial intelligence (Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Act) and amending certain union legislative acts (COM(2021) 206 ﬁnal).
European Parliament. (2020). Resolution of 20 October with recommendations to the
Commission on civil liability regimes for artiﬁcial intelligence (2020/2014 (INL)),
Oﬃcial Journal of the European Union C 404/107.
European Parliament, Committee on Industry, Research and Energy. (2022a). Draft
opinion, 2021/0106(COD). https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/JURIPA-719827_EN.pdf.
European Parliament, Committee on Legal Aﬀairs. (2022b). Draft opinion, 2021/0106
(COD). https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/JURI-PA-719827_EN.pdf.
European Parliament. (2022c). Artiﬁcial Intelligence in a digital age. European
Parliament resolution of 3 May 2022 on artiﬁcial intelligence in a digital age (2020/
2266(INI)) (P9_TA(2022) 0140).
Feldstein, S. (2019). The road to digital unfreedom: How artiﬁcial intelligence is reshaping repression. Journal of Democracy, 30(1), 40–52. https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.
2019.0003
Fenwick, M., Kaal, W. A., & Vermeulen, E. P. M. (2017). Regulation tomorrow: What
happens when technology is faster than the law? American University Business
Law Review, 6(3), 561–594. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2834531
Fishkin, J. S. (2018). Democracy when the people are thinking: Revitalizing our politics
through public deliberation. Oxford University Press.
Flonk, D. (2021). Emerging illiberal norms: Russia and China as promoters of internet
content control. International Aﬀairs, 97(6), 1925–1944. http://doi.org/10.1093/ia/
iiab146
Floridi, L., & Cowls, J. (2022). A uniﬁed framework of ﬁve principles for AI in society. In S.
Carta (Ed.), Machine learning and the city: Applications in architecture and urban
design (pp. 535–545). John Wiley & Sons.
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand, P., Dignum, V., Luetge, C.,
Madelin, R., Pagallo, U., Rossi, F., Schafer, B., Valcke, P., & Vayena, E. (2018).
AI4People-An ethical framework for a good AI society: Opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Minds and Machines, 28(4), 689–707. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5
Fung, A., & Warren, M. E. (2011). The participedia project: An introduction. International
Public Management Journal, 14(3), 341–362. https://doi.org/10.1080/10967494.
2011.618309
Furman, J., & Seamans, R. (2018). AI and the economy. NBER Working Paper Series
no.24689.
Gasser, U., Budish, R., & Ashar, A. (2018). Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) for Development:
Module on setting the stage for AI governance – Interfaces, infrastructures, and

1748

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

institutions for policymakers and regulators. Retrieved September 10, 2022, from
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Conferences/GSR/Documents/GSR2018/documents/
AISeries_GovernanceModule_GSR18.pdf
Gill, A. S. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence and international security: The long view. Ethics
and International Aﬀairs, 33(2), 169–179. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0892679419000145
Grabs, J., Auld, G., & Cashore, B. (2021). Private regulation, public policy, and the perils
of adverse ontological selection. Regulation and Governance, 15(4), 1183–1208.
https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12354
Gravett, W. H. (2020). Digital coloniser? China and artiﬁcial intelligence in Africa.
Survival, 62(6), 153–178. https://doi.org/10.1080/00396338.2020.1851098
Green, J. F. (2014). Rethinking private authority: Agents and entrepreneurs in global
environmental governance. Princeton University Press.
Grigorescu, A. (2015). Democratic international organizations? Normative pressures and
decision-making rules. Cambridge University Press.
Gunning, D., Vorm, E., Wang, J. Y., & Turek, M. (2021). DARPA’s explainable AI (XAI) program:
A retrospective. Applied AI Letters, 2(4), e61. https://doi.org/10.1002/ail2.61
Guo, J., & Li, B. (2018). The application of medical artiﬁcial intelligence technology in
rural areas of developing countries. Health Equity, 2(1), 174–191. https://doi.org/10.
1089/heq.2018.0037
Hamet, P., & Tremblay, J. (2017). Artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine. Metabolism, 69
(Supplement), 36–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2017.01.011
Hasselbalch, J. A. (2018). Innovation assessment: Governing through periods of disruptive technological change. Journal of European Public Policy, 25(12), 1855–1873.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2017.1363805
He, J., Baxter, S. L., Xu, J., Xu, J., Zhou, X., & Zhang, K. (2019). The practical implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies in medicine. Nature Medicine, 25(1), 30–
36. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0307-0
Hine, E., & Floridi, L. (2022, forthcoming). Artiﬁcial intelligence with American values
and Chinese characteristics: A comparative analysis of American and Chinese governmental AI policies. AI & Society. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01499-8
Hintze, O. (1975). Military organization and the organization of the state. In F. Gilbert
(Ed.), The historical essays of Otto Hintze (pp. 178–215). Oxford University Press. First
published in 1906.
HLEG-AI: EU High-level Expert Group on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. (2019). Ethics guidelines
for trustworthy AI. European Commission.
Hofmann, J. (2018). Digitalisierung und demokratischer Wandel als Spiegelbilder? In F.
Martinsen (Ed.), Wissen – Macht – Meinung. Demokratie und Digitalisierung: Die 20.
Hannah-Arendt-Tage 2017 (pp. 14–21). Velbrück Wissenschaft.
Hong, S.-H., Lee, J., Jang, S., & Hwang, H. (2022). Making regulation ﬂexible for the governance of disruptive innovation: A comparative study of AVs regulation in the
United Kingdom and South Korea. Journal of European Public Policy, 29(11).
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.2096101
Horowitz, M. C. (2016, July 29). Who’ll want artiﬁcially intelligent weapons? ISIS, democracies, or autocracies? Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. http://thebulletin.org/
who’llwant-artiﬁcially-intelligent-weapons-isis-democracies-orautocracies9692.
IEEE. (2019). Ethically aligned design – a vision for prioritizing human well-being with
autonomous and intelligent systems. https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieeestandards/standards/web/documents/other/ead1e.pdf.
Inglehart, R. (1990). Culture shift in advanced industrialized society. Princeton University
Press.

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1749

ITU: International Telecommunication Union. (2021). AI for good – accelerating the
United Nations sustainable development goals. https://aiforgood.itu.int/
Jervis, R. C. (1997). System eﬀects: Complexity in political and social life. Princeton
University Press.
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines.
Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(9), 389–399. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2
Katznelson, I. (1996). Liberalism’s Crooked Circle. Princeton University Press.
Kerry, C. F., Meltzer, J. P., Renda, A., Engler, A. C., & Fanni, R. (2021, October).
Strengthening International Cooperation on AI: Progress report. Report from the
Brookings Institution and Centre for European Policy Studies Forum for
Cooperation on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Khan, S. (2022, March 1). How can AI support diversity, equity and inclusion? World
Economic Forum.
Kinniburgh, F., Selin, H., Selin, N. E., & Schreurs, M. (2022, forthcoming). When private
governance impedes multilateralism: The case of international pesticide governance. Regulation & Governance. https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12463
Kiron, D., & Unruh, D. (2019). Even If AI can cure loneliness — should It? MIT Sloan
Management Review, 60(2).
König, P. D., & Wenzelburger, G. (2019). Why parties take up digitization in their manifestos:
An empirical analysis of eight western European economies. Journal of European Public
Policy, 26(11), 1678–1695. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2018.1544268
König, P. D., Wurster, S., & Siewert, M. B. (2022). Consumers are willing to pay a price for
explainable, but not for green AI: Evidence from a choice-based conjoint analysis.
Big Data and Society, 9(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1177/20539517211069632
Latour, B. (2007). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory.
Oxford University Press.
Leicht-Deobald, U., Busch, T., Schank, C., Weibel, A., Schafheitle, S., Wildhaber, I., &
Kasper, G. (2019). The challenges of algorithm-based HR decision-making for personal integrity. Journal of Business Ethics, 160(2), 377–392. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10551-019-04204-w
Lütge, C. (2019). White paper on AI ethics and governance: Building a connected, intelligent and ethical world. https://ieai.mcts.tum.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/
White-Paper_AI-Ethics-and-Governance-_March-20201.pdf.
Lütge, C. (2020). AI ethics and governance: Building a connected, intelligent and ethical
world. https://ieai.mcts.tum.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/White-Paper_AI-Ethic
s-and-Governance-_March-20201.pdf.
Lütge, C., Poszler, F., Joaquin Acosta, A., Danks, D., Gottehrer, G., Mihet-Popa, N. L., &
Naseer, A. (2021). AI4People-ethical guidelines for the automotive sector:
Fundamental requirements and practical recommendations. International Journal
of Technoethics, 12(1), 101–125. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJT.20210101.oa2
Maasen, S., & Sutter, B. (2020). Die Neuerﬁndung der Soziologie in einer, für eine und
mit einer sich digitalisierende(n) Gesellschaft. In S. Maasen & J.-H. Passoth (Eds.),
Soziale Welt Sonderband: Vol. 23. Soziologie des Digitalen - Digitale Soziologie? (pp.
73–90). Nomos. https://doi.org/10.5771/9783845295008
Mann, M. (1993). The sources of social power, vol.2: The rise of classes and nation states,
1760–1914. Cambridge University Press.
McCarthy, J. (1989). Review of the question of artiﬁcial intelligence edited by Brian
Bloomﬁeld. Annals of the History of Computing. http://www-formal.stanford.edu/
jmc/reviews/bloomﬁeld.pdf.

1750

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

McCarthy, J., Minsky, M. L., Rochester, N., & Shannon, C. E. (1955). A proposal for the
Dartmouth summer research project on artiﬁcial intelligence. Retrieved March 31,
2017, from http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/history/dartmouth/dartmouth.
html
Meinecke, F. (1948). Schaﬀender Spiegel: Studien zur Deutschen Geschichtschreibung
und Geschichtsauﬀassung. Stuttgart.
Meltzer, J. (2021, June). The role of international standards in AI and the geopolitical
implications. Brookings. Unpublished manuscript (on ﬁle with the corresponding
author).
Meltzer, J. P., & Tielemans, A. (2022, May). The European Union AI Act: Next steps and
issues for building international cooperation. Brookings Institution Policy Brief.
Mertes, S., Huber, T., Weitz, K., Heimerl, A., & André, E. (2022). GANterfactual – counterfactual explanations for medical non-experts using generative adversarial learning.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligences, 5(4). art. 825565. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2022.
825565
Milner, H. V. (2006). The digital divide: The role of political institutions in technology
diﬀusion. Comparative Political Studies, 39(2), 176–199. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0010414005282983
Milner, H. V., & Solstad, S. U. (2021). Technological change and the international
system. World Politics, 73(3), 545–589. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0043887121000010
Molnar, C. (2022). A guide for making black box models explainable. Lulu Publishers.
Moravcsik, A. (1997). Taking preferences seriously: A liberal theory of international
politics. International Organization, 51(4), 513–553. https://doi.org/10.1162/
002081897550447
Mosley, L. (2009). Private governance for the public good? Exploring private sector
participation in global ﬁnancial regulation. In H. V. Milner & A. Moravcsik (Eds.),
Power, interdependence, and non-state actors in world politics (pp. 126–146).
Princeton University Press.
Munck, G. L. (2004). Tools for qualitative research. In H. E. Brady & D. Collier (Eds.),
Rethinking social inquiry: Diverse tools (1st ed., pp. 105–121). Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Nield, D. (2019, November 21). A promising solar energy breakthrough just achieved
1,000-degree heat from sunlight. ScienceAlert, Retrieved September 10, 2022, from
https://www.sciencealert.com/ai-plus-sunlight-equals-hotter-solar-ovens-and-noneed-for-fossil-fuels.
Nitzberg, M., & Zysman, J. (2022). Algorithms, data, and platforms: The diverse challenges of governing AI. Journal of European Public Policy, 29(11). https://doi.org/
10.1080/13501763.2022.2096668
NSCAI: National Security Commission on Artiﬁcial Intelligence [of the United States].
(2021). Final Report. https://assets.foleon.com/eu-west-2/uploads-7e3kk3/48187/
nscai_full_report_digital.04d6b124173c.pdf
Obermeyer, Z., Powers, B., Vogeli, C., & Mullainathan, S. (2019). Dissecting racial bias in
an algorithm used to manage the health of populations. Science, 366(6464), 447–
453. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aax2342
OECD. (2019). OECD principles on AI. https://www.oecd.org/going-digital/ai/principles/.
OECD.AI. (2021, March 1). Database of national AI policies. https://oecd.ai/en/dashboards.
Owen, R., Bessant, J., & Heintz, M. (2013). Responsible Innovation: Managing the responsible emergence of science and innovation in society. Wiley.
Pagallo, U., Aurucci, P., Casanovas, P., Chatila, R., Chazerand, P., Dignum, V., Luetge, C.,
Madelin, R., Schafer, B., & Valcke, P. (2019). On Good AI Governance: 14 priority

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

1751

actions, a S.M.A.R.T. model of governance, and a regulatory toolbox. AI4People.
AI4Peoples-Report-on-Good-AI-Governance_compressed.pdf (eismd.eu).
Pauwelyn, J., Maggetti, M., Büthe, T., & Berman, A. (2022). Rethinking Participation in
Global Governance: Voice and Inﬂuence after Stakeholder Reforms in Global Finance
and Health. Oxford University Press.
Renda, A. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence: Ethics, governance and policy challenges. Centre
for European Policy Studies.
Roberts, H., Cowls, J., Morley, J., Taddeo, M., Wang, V., & Floridi, L. (2021). The Chinese
approach to artiﬁcial intelligence: An analysis of policy, ethics, and regulation. AI
and Society, 36(1), 59–77. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-00992-2
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2020). Artiﬁcial intelligence: A modern approach (4th ed.).
Pearson.
Samek, W., Montavon, G., Vedaldi, A., Hansen, L. K., & Müller, K.-R. (2019). Explainable AI:
Interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning. Springer. (State-of-the-art
survey, 11700).
Sartori, G. (1970). Concept misformation in comparative politics. American Political
Science Review, 64(4), 1033–1053.
Schleifer, P., Fiorini, M., & Fransen, L. (2019). Missing the bigger picture: A populationlevel analysis of transnational private governance organizations active in the global
south. Ecological Economics, 164(art.106362). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.
2019.106362
Schönmann, M., Bodenschatz, A., Uhl, M., & Walkowitz, G. (2022). The care-dependent
are less averse to care robots: Comparing intuitions of the aﬀected and the nonaﬀected. Munich Papers in Political Economy, 24.
Shadbolt, N., Van Kleek, M., & Binns, R. (2016). The rise of social machines. IEEE
Consumer Electronics Magazine, 5(2), 106–111. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCE.2016.
2516179
Shin, D. (2021). The eﬀects of explainability and causability on perception, trust, and
acceptance: Implications for explainable AI. International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 146(Feb). art.102551. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102551
Siegmann, C., & Anderljung, M. (2022). The Brussels eﬀect and artiﬁcial intelligence: How
EU regulation will impact the global AI market. Report from the Centre for the
Governance of AI.
Stephan, B. (2018). Im toten Winkel. Süddeutsche Zeitung Magazin 51/2018.
TCS: TATA Consultancy Services. (2017). Getting smarter by the day: How AI is elevating
the performance of global companies, TCS global trend study: Part 1. Retrieved
September 10, 2022. https://www.tcs.com/content/dam/tcs/pdf/Industries/globaltrend-studies/ai/TCS-GTS-how-AI-elevating-performance-global-companies.pdf.
Topol, E. J. (2019). High-performance medicine: The convergence of human and artiﬁcial intelligence. Nature Medicine, 25(1), 44–56. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-0180300-7
Unruh, C. F., Haid, C., Fottner, J., & Büthe, T. (2022). Human autonomy in algorithmic
management. Proceedings of the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
Society (pp. 753–762). https://doi.org/10.1145/3514094.3534168
Vincent, C. J., Niezen, G., O’Kane, A. A., & Stawarz, K. (2015). Can standards and regulations keep up with health technology? JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth, 3(2), e64.
https://doi.org/10.2196/mhealth.3918
Vogel, D. (2005). The market for virtue: The potential and limits of corporate social
responsibility. Brookings Institution Press.

1752

T. BÜTHE ET AL.

European Commission, Directorate-General for Communication, & von der Leyen, U.
(2019). A union that strives for more: My agenda for Europe: Political guidelines for
the next European Commission 2019-2024. Publications Oﬃce.
Von Ingersleben-Seip, N. (2022). Competition and cooperation in artiﬁcial intelligence
standard setting: Explaining emergent patterns. Unpublished manuscript.
Von Ingersleben-Seip, N., & Georgieva, Z. (forthcoming). Old tools for the new
economy? Counterfactual causation in foreclosure assessment and choice of remedies on data-driven markets. Journal of Antitrust Enforcement.
Walker, R. (2021, June 7). Germany warns: AI arms race already underway. DW News.
Weitz, K., Hassan, T., Schmid, U., & Garbas, J.-U. (2019). Deep-Learned faces of pain and
emotions: Elucidating the diﬀerences of facial expressions with the help of explainable AI methods. Technisches Messen, 86(7–8), 404–412. https://doi.org/10.1515/
teme-2019-0024
Winner, L. (1980). Do artifacts have politics? Daedalus, 109(1), 177–192.
Zysman, J., & Kenney, M. (2017). Intelligent tools and digital platforms: Implications for
work and employment. Intereconomics, 52(6), 329–334. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10272-017-0699-y
Zysman, J., & Newman, A. L. (2006). How revolutionary was the digital revolution? National
responses, market transitions, and global technology. Stanford University Press.
Zysman, J., & Nitzberg, M. (2020). Governing AI: Understanding the limits, possibilities,
and risks of AI in an era of intelligent tools and systems. Wilson Center Science and
Technology Innovation Program Report.

