ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 24 May 2022
doi: 10.3389/fcomp.2022.873437

Governance of Responsible AI: From
Ethical Guidelines to Cooperative
Policies
Robert Gianni 1*, Santtu Lehtinen 2 and Mika Nieminen 2
1

Brightland Institute for Smart Society, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2 Ethics and Responsibility of
Innovations, VTT Technical Research Center of Finland, Tampere, Finland

Edited by:
Kostas Karpouzis,
Panteion University, Greece
Reviewed by:
Stavroula Tsinorema,
University of Crete, Greece
Styliani Kleanthous,
Open University of Cyprus, Cyprus
*Correspondence:
Robert Gianni
r.gianni@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Human-Media Interaction,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Computer Science
Received: 10 February 2022
Accepted: 26 April 2022
Published: 24 May 2022
Citation:
Gianni R, Lehtinen S and Nieminen M
(2022) Governance of Responsible AI:
From Ethical Guidelines to
Cooperative Policies.
Front. Comput. Sci. 4:873437.
doi: 10.3389/fcomp.2022.873437

The increasingly pervasive role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in our societies is radically
changing the way that social interaction takes place within all fields of knowledge.
The obvious opportunities in terms of accuracy, speed and originality of research are
accompanied by questions about the possible risks and the consequent responsibilities
involved in such a disruptive technology. In recent years, this twofold aspect has led to
an increase in analyses of the ethical and political implications of AI. As a result, there
has been a proliferation of documents that seek to define the strategic objectives of
AI together with the ethical precautions required for its acceptable development and
deployment. Although the number of documents is certainly significant, doubts remain
as to whether they can effectively play a role in safeguarding democratic decision-making
processes. Indeed, a common feature of the national strategies and ethical guidelines
published in recent years is that they only timidly address how to integrate civil society into
the selection of AI objectives. Although scholars are increasingly advocating the necessity
to include civil society, it remains unclear which modalities should be selected. If both
national strategies and ethics guidelines appear to be neglecting the necessary role of a
democratic scrutiny for identifying challenges, objectives, strategies and the appropriate
regulatory measures that such a disruptive technology should undergo, the question
is then, what measures can we advocate that are able to overcome such limitations?
Considering the necessity to operate holistically with AI as a social object, what theoretical
framework can we adopt in order to implement a model of governance? What conceptual
methodology shall we develop that is able to offer fruitful insights to governance of AI?
Drawing on the insights of classical pragmatist scholars, we propose a framework of
democratic experimentation based on the method of social inquiry. In this article, we first
summarize some of the main points of discussion around the potential societal, ethical
and political issues of AI systems. We then identify the main answers and solutions by
analyzing current national strategies and ethics guidelines. After showing the theoretical
and practical limits of these approaches, we outline an alternative proposal that can help
strengthening the active role of society in the discussion about the role and extent of
AI systems.
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, governance, ethics, democracy—citizen, National Strategy for Artificial
Intelligence, pragmatism

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

1

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

INTRODUCTION

asymmetries, interests and material conditions necessary to
implement AI-based technologies (Crawford, 2021). In addition,
social contexts are in constant change, making any precise
predictions even more difficult. Such abstractness, together with
the arbitrary way of selecting those principles (it is not clear,
why exactly one particular set of principles should be selected
over another set of principles and followed as a basis for AI
policy) for the deployment and implementation of AI systems,
witnesses a gap between the establishment of acceptable norms
and their acceptance in plural and complex societies, which
raises questions about the legitimacy and efficacy of current
ethics guidelines.
On the other hand, the political ambitions reflected in
the torrent of published national AI strategies and policies
predominantly emphasize the necessity to preserve the general
wellbeing of society and focus on political and economic
objectives in the implementation of AI, without providing further
indications on how such objectives are identified according to
a democratic process and public engagement of civil society
stakeholders, nor do they discuss how these objectives would
match societal challenges identified by citizens. Instead, the
governance approaches presented in the national AI strategies
appear to rely on the above-mentioned ethical guidelines and
abstract moral principles, thus lacking concrete approaches
toward responsible and ethical civil society engagement. The
suggested governance frameworks, in turn, tend to remain
relatively abstract and ambiguous regarding, for instance, policy
related aspects of power.
If both national strategies and ethics guidelines appear to
be neglecting the necessary role of a democratic scrutiny for
identifying challenges, objectives, strategies and the appropriate
regulatory measures that such a disruptive technology should
undergo, the question is then, what suggestions can we
advocate that are able to overcome such limitations? In
other words, considering the necessity to operate holistically
with AI as a social object, what theoretical framework can
we adopt in order to implement a model of governance
(Ostrom, 2005)? What conceptual methodology shall we
develop that is able to offer fruitful insights to governance
of AI?
While we are starting to find suggestions amongst scholars
to engage stakeholders and citizens in the process of governing
AI implementation (Yeung et al., 2019; Delacroix and Wagner,
2021; Stix, 2021), these are not mirrored in official documents
delineating the regulatory framework of AI. We argue that
a truly democratic approach to AI cannot be enforced if
contextual actors are not included in the discussion about
what values, objectives and challenges the AI systems should
address. Drawing on the insights of classical pragmatist scholars
like John Dewey and Mead, we propose a framework of
democratic experimentation based on the method of social
inquiry. Furthermore, we will show how such a democratic
theory has a concrete ethical value as it builds on the reflexive
cooperation amongst individuals that can generate a significant
development of freedom, equality, and solidarity. Therefore,
to be able to avoid technocratic and arbitrary approaches,
we argue that it is necessary to take a step back and adopt

Artificial intelligence is becoming pervasive in our societies at
an increasing rate. Multiple actors in several domains from
healthcare to warfare have introduced AI based technologies in
order to improve the analysis and processing of large amounts
of data. The widespread application of AI technology raises
questions about its societal impacts. Alongside the increasingly
polarized aspects related to the impact of controversial
technologies, like robots and mass surveillance algorithms,
scholars have raised the attention on current side effects of
AI-based systems, suggesting that the development of concrete
governance of AI cannot be longer delayed (Pasquale, 2015;
O’Neil, 2016; Crawford, 2021).
Accordingly, these concrete risks and threats, together with
the necessity to regulate the trajectories of AI research, have
generated a proliferation of national strategies documents
(Dutton, 2018; Berryhill et al., 2019; Misuraca and Van Noordt,
2020; Van Roy et al., 2021) as well as guidelines listing
fundamental moral principles to be observed when designing
AI-based technologies. For instance, scholars and practitioners
have frequently highlighted the necessity to respect fundamental
values of privacy, personal freedom, and respect (Floridi et al.,
2018; European Commission, 2020). Concurrently, number of
scholars have suggested various AI governance frameworks and
operationalization of them in public administration (Wallach and
Marchant, 2018; Winfield and Jirotka, 2018; Clarke, 2019; Sun
and Medaglia, 2019; Ulnicane et al., 2021).
However, despite a number of ethical guidelines and
governance frameworks utilized in policymaking, less attention
has been dedicated to the concrete application of the trajectories
and objectives that AI-based technologies should follow in order
to respect value-based norms. In fact, although the appeals to
mechanisms like that of accountability and transparency, and
principles such as fairness are widely shared, it is not clear how
they should be implemented, particularly when considering the
plurality of actors, values and interests present in the current
societal constellation. It has been argued that these indications
suffer from indeterminacy and abstractness, puzzling designers
and developers about their implementation (Hagendorff, 2020).
Furthermore, their fuzziness together with an overproduction
of overlapping documents has raised some doubts about the
real intentions behind their adoption in terms of ethics washing
(Bietti, 2020). While there are also suggestions to operationalize
ethical principles (Yeung et al., 2019; de Almeida et al., 2021;
Stix, 2021; Sigfrids et al., 2022), to our knowledge, there
are yet no empirical evidence, pilots or experimentations on
suggested solutions.
On the one hand, we argue that ethics guidelines are
based on an ideal model, assuming that individuals can pursue
ethically sound processes by following universal principles.
This conception stands on the presumption of a wellinformed abstract subject that shares and apply those principles
without considerations about complexities of her/his social
environment. The resolution of ethics into a set of fixed
principles overlooks their relationship with a socio-economic
environment formed by a plurality of contextual values, power

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

2

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

amount of resources in the future development of AI (Saran et al.,
2018).
Concurrently, AI technology has raised several concerns
because of aspects related to its autonomy and uncertain sideeffects. Some of the main issues are of moral nature and relate
to privacy, discrimination and responsibility. First, it is not
always clear what data are collected and what are the exact
purposes of such processing. Although regulations like GDPR
help avoiding mishandling of data collection, the process of
consent is often too complex and socially driven, disregarding the
necessary and actual freedom that individuals should have when
sharing their data. Wachter et al. (2017), have also questioned the
ambiguity of the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679
(GDPR) indications about automated decision-making and the
right to explanation.
Secondly, AI is designed following existing socio-technical
knowledge and economic interests that are contextually formed
and that can inadvertently be integrated into an algorithm
(Hagendorff, 2020). Consequently, algorithms tend to reflect
the specific perspectives of the designers. It is highly possible
that instead of correcting human arbitrariness toward increasing
objectivity, AI can reproduce and reinforce various existing
subjective perspectives. The fact that machines are often invested
with an aura of technical infallibility can result in decreased
critical scrutiny. Recent examples have shown how investigations
and assessments relying too strongly on automatic processing can
become discriminatory. This has become particularly evident in
the field of facial recognition used, amongst other applications,
in hiring processes. Raji et al. (2020) for instance have argued
that the automatic selection to reduce discriminatory effects
on the basis of ethnicity can increase racial biases instead
of reducing them. They have shown that the demographic
benchmark necessary to inform the algorithm can often prioritize
groups or profiles that are easier to categorize. Benthall and
Hynes (2019) have highlighted that although “ethnicity” is an
attribute that can be identified with racial categories, these are
themselves social constructs, grouping individuals with different
phenotypic traits and cultural backgrounds. Consequently, AI
can then legitimize stereotypical evaluations and disregard nonconforming individuals.
This leads to the third point concerning the responsibility
for the potential negative effects generated or perpetrated by
an AI system. It is challenging to identify the appropriate
responsible parties in a process that involves ‘many hands’ and
that evolves as AI are many times self-learning systems. If the
autonomous systems do not fall under the broader mechanisms
of responsibility, then their autonomy appears questionable and
even dangerous.
These three specific aspects have raised discussions on
the overall opacity of AI processing systems, as well as its
immediate and longer terms objectives. Furthermore, from a
more philosophical point of view, debates have also rotated
around the new ontology potentially emerging with AI, raising
questions about autonomy (Calvo et al., 2020), the relation
between subjects, objects, and new moral (Russia, 2019) and
juridical categories under which AI should fall (Bennett and Daly,
2020). In the next sections, we shortly identify and analyze the

forms of governance that are able to offer cooperative and
participatory solutions.
In this article, we first summarize some of the main points
of discussion around the potential societal, ethical and political
issues of AI systems. We then identify the main answers
provide by public and private actors by analyzing current
national strategies and ethics guidelines. After showing the
theoretical and practical limits of these approaches, we delineate
an alternative proposal that can help strengthening the active
role of society in the discussion about the role and extent of
AI systems.

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: A RADICAL
CHANGE FOR SOCIETY AND
GOVERNANCE?
Applications of AI are growingly adopted in different walks of
life like health, finance, security, agriculture, and transport. The
volume of data that AI systems can analyze is unprecedented
and can provide with new knowledge in a timely manner. The
importance of being among the protagonists of the emerging AI
society has been portrayed as a “race” (Cave and ÓhÉigeartaigh,
2018) amongst states toward amassing investments from national
and supranational institutions in order to achieve global
technological supremacy (Saran et al., 2018).
The immediate benefits generated by the adoption of AI
systems are of economic and social nature. Some popular
examples of the opportunities entailed by AI can be identified
in autonomous cars, robots, online customer support and the
automatization of repetitive and alienating tasks (Makridakis,
2017). In economics, Koehler (2018) has shown how AI can
strengthen business models by optimizing parameters and
minimizing classification errors, improving the process in terms
of data collection, prediction, decision, and action. Other
tangible examples of these positive outcomes concern the time
consumption in hiring processes or venue selections, in sectors
like tourism (Johnson et al., 2020). In the health sector AI has
proven beneficial to improve the diagnostic phase, operational
accuracy, and patient care as well as bringing an overall cost
reduction (Hague, 2019; Yeasmin, 2019). In agriculture the
creation of digital twins or big data collection through sensors
has significantly impacted the management processes and the
productivity of this field (Smith, 2018). Lazic (2019) has also
highlighted the strategic role of AI in the identification of
obscuration processes in terms of cybersecurity. AI can also
increase objectivity in juridical evaluations when assessed with
non-ideal human decision-making scenarios (Green and Chen,
2019; Yu and Du, 2019).
Moreover, AI can entail long-term political effects by
strengthening the role of certain groups or countries. For
instance, Allen (2019) has highlighted the effort made by the
Chinese government to enhance national competitiveness and
protect national security. Although Toll et al. (2019) have shown
that the discourse around AI benefits in the public sector might
be over optimistic given the current state of the art, it is true that
public institutions and governments are investing a considerable

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

3

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

category. The contributors (Yeung et al., 2019; e.g., Stix, 2021)
of the third category emphasize that a major challenge for the
suggested AI ethics principles and frameworks is their limited
uptake in the actual AI policy and development practices. This
is in spite of the number of relatively concrete and operational
governance tools and mechanisms that have been suggested,
including the relatively detailed proposals on various technical
tools, development of legal and coordination procedures,
instruments and institutions, as well as financial incentives for
ethical principles and procedures (Wallach and Marchant, 2018;
Sun and Medaglia, 2019; Tsamados et al., 2021). Additionally, in
order to ensure compliance with the operationalized ethics and
human rights principles, concrete administrational structures for
the monitoring and controlling compliance as well as sanction
mechanisms have also been presented (Wallach and Marchant,
2018; Sun and Medaglia, 2019; Tsamados et al., 2021; see Sigfrids
et al., 2022).
However, when AI ethics guidelines and frameworks are
utilized as a basis for governance, there are often political issues
that can be left out of the scope of discussion. Crawford (2021)
has recently pointed out that ethics guidelines tend to shift
the attention away from issues such as working conditions,
environmental footprint, and deep cultural changes. These are
only three examples of the manifold repercussions that AI
is generating that are not explicitly addressed by the ethical
guidelines. These aspects are the expression of power dynamics
present in our societies, which may not be mitigated but rather
reinforced through AI-based technologies. Jobin et al. (2019)
for instance, have shown that ethics codes are mostly produced
by economically developed countries leaving little space of
discussion to less powerful actors. Accordingly, as Crawford
(2021) concludes, AI ethics is necessary but not sufficient to deal
with dynamics of power entrenched in AI development.
Furthermore, apart from the current legislation that to some
extent concerns AI and steers its implementation (e.g., GDPR
and the general principles of good public governance), recently
proposed legislation on AI1 , and some program or organization
based initiatives to our knowledge, there is yet no systematic
empirical or real-life experiment on putting these suggestions
systematically and comprehensively into practice. Thus, for
the time being, the suggested models have been more or less
hypothetical, based on rational scrutiny and aimed at facilitating
policy and AI governance development (Sigfrids et al., 2022).
Thus, the existing governance and policy-making seems to
reside at an arm’s length from the suggested ethics guidelines and
governance frameworks, leaving room for continuing discussion
on the actual use of power and democratic mechanisms in the
policy-making and governance of AI. In the following, we focus
on this aspect by asking what are the current policy frameworks
for utilizing AI, and how a more democratic approach could be
supported with ideas from social philosophy.
Thus far, the most important policy attempts to define societal
aims and frameworks for the utilization of AI can be found in the
national AI strategies that several governments around the world
have promulgated in the last 5 years. In the following section we

main answers that have been provided by public institutions and
private actors to address these concerns.

AI GOVERNANCE: FROM NATIONAL
STRATEGIES TO ETHICAL GUIDELINES
The field of AI governance has developed around the need to
understand, control, govern, steer and shape AI technology as
well as the institutions and contexts around which it is built
(Dafoe, 2018, p. 5). Therefore, the research contributions and
suggestions on public AI governance have proliferated during the
last few years (Cath, 2018; Cath et al., 2018; e.g., Taeihagh, 2021),
with the role of public sector being under particular scrutiny (de
Sousa et al., 2019; Kuziemski and Misuraca, 2020; e.g., Zuiderwijk
et al., 2021). It is possible to divide these contributions on public
AI governance into three categories (see Sigfrids et al., 2022).
The first category includes contributions suggesting
comprehensive governance frameworks aiming to create an
overall understanding of the wide systemic socio-technical
phenomenon and suggest broader sets of integrated approaches
and tools to govern such a phenomenon. There are some
differences among the contributions for instance in terms of how
much weight they give to so-called soft governance mechanisms
(not lawfully binding steering e.g., with information) and hard
governance (binding regulation). In some contributions, more
room is given to self-organization of AI developers, while public
governance provides the general statutory framework in which
the development should take place (Wirtz et al., 2020; de Almeida
et al., 2021). In others, all AI systems should be subjected to
relatively strict regulation and enforcement (Wallach and
Marchant, 2018; Yeung et al., 2019). Overall, the contributions in
this first category are concerned with the societal impacts of AI
and see that negative impacts should be avoided with informed
policy, which is supported among others by impact assessments
and stakeholder consultations (Sigfrids et al., 2022).
The second category focuses on the processes by which public
governance of AI should be conducted. The specific attention
in these contributions is on the practical governance processes
and principles by which such processes should work. Attention
has been paid to the questions on how stakeholder engagement
and public deliberation should be organized (Sun and Medaglia,
2019; Buhmann and Fieseler, 2021; Ulnicane et al., 2021), about
the nature of regulation and steering processes, and with regard
to the need of long-term and adaptive governance strategies and
practices (Liu and Maas, 2021). It has been also suggested that
a specific regulatory agency or relevant administrative bodies
should have responsibility of approval of algorithms, supervision
of AI developers, impact assessments, as well as certification and
testing of algorithms (Bannister and Connolly, 2020; Dignam,
2020). In general, the contributions of this category argue that
governance should support the operationalization of principles
of good governance and AI ethics (Sigfrids et al., 2022).
The third category deals specifically with the question of how
ethics and human rights principles could be operationalized to
the policy-making process with concrete tools and mechanisms.
This third category overlaps to some extent with the second

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

1 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206

4

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

analyzed as the mechanism that coordinates between the
different competing visions for the development, deployment
and regulation of AI, whereas national strategies consolidate
the normative elements in the public discourse (Wilson, 2022).
Indeed, national AI strategies have been aptly described as “a
hybrid of policy and discourse that offers imaginaries, allocates
resources, and sets rules” (Bareis and Katzenbach, 2021, p. 2).
Moreover, because of their hybrid nature, AI strategies have
specific democratic function in shaping the visionary potential
for political agency by describing the relationship between
citizens and governments (Paltieli, 2021).

will shorty analyze the main objectives and visions of the societal
utilization of AI and measures to achieve them.

National AI Strategies: Missing
Governance?
Given the crucial importance of AI for future economic and
political positioning, Nation-states around the world are seeking
to develop their capacity to harness and steer AI development
and deployment toward their particular national ends (Radu,
2021). One manifestation of this trend has been the fast-paced
global proliferation of National AI strategies from 2016 onwards
(Dutton, 2018). As Ulnicane et al. (2020, p. 165) observe, the
framing of AI as a separate strategic technological priority in need
of a dedicated national strategy, is an important fact in itself.
The simultaneous publication of dozens of national strategies
constructed around a single technology (Dutton, 2018, p. 4),
reveals the role of AI as the “key sociotechnical institution” of
our age (Bareis and Katzenbach, 2021, p. 22).
Despite their relative recent origin, there have been various
studies performed on National AI strategies (Dexe and Franke,
2020; Viscusi et al., 2020; Fatima et al., 2021; Saariluoma and
Salo-Pöntinen, 2021; Saveliev and Zhurenkov, 2021; Wilson,
2022). National AI strategies have been analyzed for example in
terms of the sociotechnical imaginaries (Bareis and Katzenbach,
2021) and political imaginaries (Paltieli, 2021) that they contain.
Fatima et al. (2020) have analyzed over 30 national strategies
produced during the last 5 years in order to understand
national-level strategic actions in the field of AI. Although
the strategies offer distinct national imaginaries, priorities
and approaches (Bareis and Katzenbach, 2021), they are also
remarkably similar in many ways (Fatima et al., 2020). These
similarities and differences in the national AI strategies have also
been outlined in various analyses and reports (Dutton, 2018;
Saran et al., 2018; Berryhill et al., 2019; Bradley and Wingfield,
2020; Misuraca and Van Noordt, 2020; e.g., Van Roy et al.,
2021).
In terms of governance, national strategies are a key
document class that outlines political aims and broader
governance objectives in the field of AI. National AI strategies
are a way of signaling the particular AI pathway or a rationale
(Fatima et al., 2021) of a state in the field of global AI
development, or “AI race” (Cave and ÓhÉigeartaigh, 2018).
Besides this rationale, the strategies also contain various
expectations, visions and narratives of AI technology,
constituting sociotechnical imaginaries (Jasanoff and
Kim, 2009) and imagined futures (Beckert, 2016) that are
embedded in the national AI strategies (Bareis and Katzenbach,
2021).
Following Wilson (2022, p. 2), we analyze National AI
strategies as “a consolidation mechanism in AI governance.” The
public discourse around AI utilizes various metaphors, myths
and rhetoric, which guide the societal discussion and future
visions of AI (Campolo and Crawford, 2020). Through national
strategies, governments allocate resources and governance
functions according to various sociotechnical imaginaries (Bareis
and Katzenbach, 2021, p. 4). Thus, AI governance can be

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

Selection of National AI Strategies
As long-term strategic plans, national AI strategies provide
valuable information on how states perceive the development
of AI (Fatima et al., 2020). Moreover, in the absence of
strong global AI regulation, the strategic documents outline
important measures and objectives of nation states in the field
of AI governance (Saveliev and Zhurenkov, 2021). National AI
strategies inspire public attention, mobilize societal resources and
direct coordination and steering efforts of the state (Misuraca and
Van Noordt, 2020).
For the purposes of this article, we have conducted a
qualitative content analysis of selected national AI strategies. In
order to select suitable strategies for analysis, we have consulted
various available databases (Future of Life, 2020; OPSI, 2020;
Zhang et al., 2021) as well as reports and lists concerning national
AI strategies (Dutton, 2018; Berryhill et al., 2019; Misuraca and
Van Noordt, 2020; Van Roy et al., 2021). We began by searching
for published AI strategies and their official or unofficial English
language translations. Secondly, we compared the different lists
and databases in order to form a comprehensive picture of the
field of national AI strategies. The most prominent database that
we used was the “The Observatory of Public Sector Innovation”
(OPSI, 2020), which lists over 50 countries that have either been
published or are in the process of drafting a national AI strategy
(Berryhill et al., 2019).
It is important to note that most national AI strategies
originate from high income countries around the world and
particularly in Europe. Therefore, we aimed to select a dataset
that would be a representative, yet also diverse, sample of
the global landscape of National AI strategies. The selection
criteria included geographical location, Gross National Product
(GDP)2 as well as Digitalization Adoption Index (DAI)3 . Table 1
outlining the selection criteria.
Besides the aforementioned criteria, there were other guiding
factors in terms of the scope and focus of the analysis as well.
While the AI policies of different countries are outlined in
various national policy measures, instruments and documents
related to AI, this analysis focuses solely on published national
AI strategy documents. National AI strategy is therefore defined
as a published document that presents the state’s coordinated
2 World Economic Outlook Database, IMF, 2020. https://www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO/weo-database/2020/April.
3 Digital Adoption Index, World Bank, 2016. https://www.worldbank.org/en/
publication/wdr2016/Digital-Adoption-Index.

5

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

strategy? What are the perceived and stated challenges related to
AI technology? What are the proposed or envisioned governance
frameworks for AI? What are the stated ethical principles
and values?

TABLE 1 | Selection of criteria.
Country

Continent

GDP, 2020, in
bn USD (IMF)

Digitalization
adoption
index, DAI
(World Bank)

Strategy
type

China

Asia

14,860.775

0.59

National
strategy

Denmark

Europe

339.626

0.79

National
strategy

Germany

Europe

3,780.553

0.84

Federal
strategy

Japan

Asia

4,910.580

0.83

National
strategy

Singapore

Asia

337.451

0.87

National
strategy

United KingdomEurope

2,638.296

0.76

Part of
broader
industrial
strategy

United States

North
America

20,807.269

0.75

Executive
order

Russia

Europe

1,464.078

0.74

Presidential
decree

Uruguay

South
America

54.135

0.76

National
strategy

Analysis of National AI Strategies
On the basis of our analysis, AI entails a great value in three
different but interrelated areas. Firstly, it is fundamental in
terms of national sovereignty and strategic geopolitical power
through technological leadership (China, 2017; Russia, 2019;
United States, 2019). Secondly, AI can attract international
talents and businesses (United Kingdom, 2018, p. 16; Japan, 2019,
p. 4) as well as creating new business models (Singapore, 2017,
p. 5), strengthening industrial production and competitiveness
(Germany, 2018, p. 8; Japan, 2019, p. 5). Thirdly, national
strategies place an emphasis on wider societal transformation,
adaptation and progress attained through the development and
deployment of AI (Germany, 2018, pp. 9, 29–30; China, 2017, pp.
5,6; Japan, 2019, pp. 1–3).
In general, AI technology is perceived as a potential tool
that can be utilized in the effort to alleviate or even solve
societal challenges from low birthrates (Japan, 2019, p. 34) to
environmental challenges (China, 2017, p. 20). The German AI
strategy emphasizes that AI is a tool that can unleash human
potential by reorienting it from repetitive tasks toward more
creative tasks (Germany, 2018, p. 25). Japanese strategy envisions
a thorough transformation of the Japanese society to a new age
of AI through the concept of Society 5.0 (Japan, 2019, p. 3).
Countries such as Uruguay and Denmark focus specifically on
developing a leadership position in the ethical and responsible
development and use of human-centered AI (Denmark, 2019, p.
8) particularly in the public sector (Uruguay, 2019, pp. 2–8).
However, countries are also aware of the potential upheavals
entrenched in AI implementation especially if forms of “general”
or “broad” AI are developed (Russia, 2019, pp. 4–5; Denmark,
2019, p. 5). The often-mentioned challenge related to the
use of AI systems is their potential nature as “black-boxes,”
whose decision-making logic can be opaque from the point
of view of the end-users and citizens (Germany, 2018, p. 16).
The Russian AI strategy notes that the lack of understanding
concerning AI-based decision-making can become a hindrance
to the development and deployment of AI in the society
(Russia, 2019, p. 5). Moreover, because of the seemingly inherent
complexity and opacity of AI-systems, their deployment can
produce unintended and unforeseen impacts (Uruguay, 2019,
p. 13).
The role of governments in the strategies is to shape
and steer the fast-paced development of AI toward particular
national goals (Radu, 2021). The ways to steer such process
so that the risks inherent in its implementation can be
mitigated are entrusted onto a set of objective standards,
be those shared global norms, technical standards or ethical
guidelines (Denmark, 2019, pp. 26,27, 30; United States, 2019,
pp. 3967–3970). Indeed, all of the selected strategies mention
at least some of the globally shared values of AI development
and use, which form principles and normative operational
tools such as trustworthiness, transparency, controllability,

approach toward maximizing the societal benefits of AI and
minimizing its risks (Dutton, 2018, p. 5). Accordingly, various
papers and documents that focus on innovation policy, public
sector transformation or digitalization are left out of the scope
of analysis (Dutton, 2018). Moreover, our focus is solely on
the strategic documents themselves and not the processes
preceding them.
The selected sample of national AI strategies was chosen
by cross-referencing various available databases and lists of
strategies. The dataset consists of national strategies that were
published before the chosen cut-off date August 2021. In the
end, we chose to analyze the strategies of nine countries: China,
Denmark, Germany, Japan, Russia, Singapore, United Kingdom,
United States and Uruguay. Table 2 listing the selected National
AI Strategies.
These countries were selected by applying the following
criteria, including: the representation of major global AI
technology developers; diversity of geographical location; and
variance in the socio-economic background. After a tentative
analysis on the sample of strategies, we concluded that no
additional value would be provided by adding new strategies
to the sample as the qualitative data was saturated. The final
selection of countries considered the availability of published
national AI strategies, the availability of trustworthy translations
and the match of the strategy to our specific definition of
national AI strategy. The selection methodology is outlined
in Figure 1.
After the selection of the dataset, we analyzed the strategies
thematically by paying specific attention to the following
elements: What are the stated objectives and visions of the

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

6

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

TABLE 2 | Selection of national AI strategies.
Selected national AI strategies
China: “Next Generation AI Development Plan.” (State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2017)
Denmark: “National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence.” (Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial Affairs, 2019)
Germany: “Federal Government’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy.” (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, Federal Ministry of Education and Research and
Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, 2018)
Japan: “AI Strategy 2019.” (Artificial Intelligence Technology Strategy Council, 2019)
Russia: “Decree of the President of the Russian Federation on the Development of Artificial Intelligence in the Russian Federation.” (President of the Russian
Federation, 2019)
Singapore: “AI Singapore.” (Smart Nation and Digital Government Office, 2017)
United Kingdom: “Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal.” (Office for Artificial Intelligence; Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and Department for
Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, 2018)
United States: “Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence.” (US President Donald Trump, 2019)
Uruguay: “Artificial Intelligence Strategy for the Digital Government.” (Office of the President, 2019)

FIGURE 1 | Methodology for selecting national AI strategies for the qualitative and thematic content analysis.

national security and civil rights (United States, 2019, pp. 3967–
3971). Countries such as Germany and Denmark make a step
further by emphasizing that the development and use of AI
should respect democratic values and processes in order to
advance the common good of the society (Germany, 2018, pp.
9,10; Denmark, 2019, pp. 8, 26). In countries such as Russia and
China, the state is the key actor that governs AI by regulating
and guiding its interactions through ethical rules, standards, and
principles (Russia, 2019, pp. 16–18; China, 2017, p. 25).
Based on our investigation, it is possible to identify a common
trait that all national strategies share: an emphasis on the
importance of partnership between government, businesses and
academia. The US for example, highlights the importance of
advancing scientific progress, economic competitiveness and
national security by retaining the lead in AI development
both in academia and industry as well as on the federal
levels (United States, 2019, pp. 3967–3968). Moreover, countries
such as Singapore and Denmark are developing public-private
partnerships in the field of data sharing by improving the
accessibility of public datasets for private use (Denmark, 2019,
p. 40; Singapore, 2017, p. 62), while the UK AI strategy

accountability, privacy, responsibility, safety and security (China,
2017; Singapore, 2017; Germany, 2018; United Kingdom, 2018;
Denmark, 2019; Japan, 2019; Russia, 2019; United States, 2019;
Uruguay, 2019). Uruguay has nine “general principles” by which
it seeks to shape responsible AI (Uruguay, 2019, p. 9) while
Japan has three “social principles” that form the approach of
human-centered AI (Japan, 2019, p. 3). Germany advocates for
an “Ethics by, in and for design” framework for AI and aims
to create public-private auditing bodies for the assessment of
algorithmic decision-making, as well as experimental sandboxes
for the development of AI (Germany, 2018, pp. 16, 23, 26).
Technologically advanced countries such as Singapore and
Denmark are also keen to create ethical frameworks based on
human-centered approach (Singapore, 2017 pp. 64–66), as well
as responsible ethical frameworks for AI development and use
(Denmark, 2019, p. 25).
However, as Jobin et al. (2019) note, the contextual
expressions of these shared principles can vary substantially
across different cultures. Indeed, some documents emphasize
that the principles of AI development and use must reflect
cultural values (Japan, 2019, pp. 59), alongside issues such as

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

7

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

“hybridity” of AI governance (Radu, 2021), as well as the
importance of Triple-Helix cooperation in AI governance.
Hybrid governance describes the blurring boundaries between
the various societal actors and their identities, while often
favoring market-oriented approaches in governance (Radu, 2021,
pp. 190,191). What is notable in this hybrid “Triple-Helix
approach” to AI governance is the fact that it tends to overshadow
the role of civil society and public engagement in governance.
Indeed, while the national AI strategies are rife with references
to public engagement, there is little evidence of specific
and concrete public engagement mechanisms and activities
(Misuraca and Van Noordt, 2020, p. 82). Instead, the public is
still often relegated to a mere passive user of AI technology or as
the recipient of various government activities, communications
and services. According to Wilson (2022, pp. 7,8), the role of
society in AI governance can be accurately characterized as an
“afterthought or a rhetorical gesture.” The National AI strategies
are more focused on traditional issues such as economic and
strategic competitiveness (Ulnicane et al., 2020, p. 161; Fatima
et al., 2020, p. 241).
In summary, the national AI strategies consolidate an
ethics approach toward AI governance, which is implemented
through the cooperation between the public sector, industry and
academia, in the practical form of various voluntary mechanisms
such as guidelines, codes of conduct and best practices. What is
lacking in these approaches to the governance of AI are more
concrete mechanisms for public engagement and the inclusion
of civil society.
Since the ethical and societal aspects of AI governance seem
to have been strongly delegated to voluntary ethical approaches
such as ethics guidelines developed by actors belonging to the
triple helix model, in the next section we will analyze the ethical
guidelines in order to evaluate their legitimacy and efficiency in
regulating AI.

emphasizes the role of AI Council, which gathers people from
different sectors within government, business and academia
(United Kingdom, 2018, p. 10).
According to our analysis, and confirmed by the relevant
literature, most of the national AI strategies tend to lack concrete
governance frameworks as well as measures to attain their
stated goals (Fatima et al., 2020, pp. 180–182, 192; Saveliev and
Zhurenkov, 2021, pp. 671–672). As Misuraca and Van Noordt
(2020) note, national AI strategies often refer to an intent to
create various ethical frameworks, principles and guidelines for
the governance of AI in the public sector (2020, pp. 54–56), while
the measures to create legislation and regulation are evidently
more limited (2020, pp. 82–85). Indeed, despite the fact that AI
is often framed as a novel strategic technology with potentially
revolutionary implications for society, governments have been
reluctant to draft specific AI related legislation and regulation
(Misuraca and Van Noordt, 2020, pp. 82–83). Instead, most
countries have been content to take a more “reflexive” approach
on AI governance (Radu, 2021) by focusing on “soft” policy
instruments such as training, education and awareness raising
campaigns (Fatima et al., 2020; Misuraca and Van Noordt, 2020).
The lack of strong legislative or regulatory approaches to AI
(Wirtz et al., 2020, p. 826) is partially explained by the supposed
unwillingness of governments to propose policy actions that
could stifle the development of AI innovations (Radu, 2021,
p. 188).
These developments mirrors Radu (2021) analysis arguing
that governments have tended to prioritize an ethics orientation
instead of pushing for strict regulatory approaches to AI
governance. Ethics-oriented governance combined with soft
policy instruments (Misuraca and Van Noordt, 2020, pp. 82–85)
provide a flexible way of ensuring that the development of AI
technology is not unduly regulated (Fatima et al., 2020, pp. 180–
182, 192). Indeed, according to Radu (2021), the rhetoric and
discourse dealing with governance in the national AI strategies
has been impacted by the idea of voluntary self-regulation, which
is the prominent approach to AI governance in the private sector.
As a result, the focus of AI governance is oriented toward the
creation of various ethical frameworks, guidelines, and codes
of conduct.
The implementation of the ethics-oriented approach to AI
governance is often supported by the creation of various national
ethical Councils, Centers and Committees that monitor and
analyze the global development of AI (Van Roy et al., 2021, pp.
15,16; Wirtz et al., 2019). Examples of these new institutions
and bodies are on display in many of the AI strategies (Radu,
2021). Denmark has created a Data-Ethics Council (Denmark,
2019, p. 29), while the German federal government works
with a Data Ethics Commission (Germany, 2018, p. 9). In
Singapore, an industry-led Council assists both private and public
sectors by providing guidance for the ethical utilization of AI
(Singapore, 2017, p. 64). In a similar fashion, the UK advances
the development and deployment of safe and ethical AI through
its new data ethics bodies and councils (United Kingdom, 2018,
p. 10).
These novel bodies consist of governmental, academic
and industrial actors, which emphasizes both the increasing

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

Ethics Guidelines as a Popular Approach
to AI Governance
Besides and triggered by national strategies, ethics guidelines
have been increasingly considered an efficient measure to prevent
or reduce harms caused by AI because of their flexibility and
potentially higher capillarity. In contrast, hard regulations can
often be too rigid to deal with fast-paced technologies or they can
represent an obstacle to technological and economic innovation.
Floridi et al. (2018) have argued that regulating AI through soft
measures can entail a double advantage, because it can prevent
counterproductive unintended side-effects, while increasing the
correspondence of AI systems to end-users needs.
Flexibility represents a core value in AI development due to
the constantly evolving aspects of AI and the need to learn. If on
the hand AI systems can autonomously improve their accuracy
on the basis of their investigations, on the other hand they can
also adapt or change after the interaction between end-users
and third parties (Rochet and Tirole, 2003), which increases the
unpredictability entailed in the overall ecosystem (Zittrain, 2006;
Floridi et al., 2018). de Reuver et al. (2020) argue that knowledge
about the medium and long-term effects of AI can never be

8

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

of fairness, reliability and security, privacy, inclusiveness
and transparency.
At a first glance these analyses and the related principles
appear widely shareable, and it is difficult to deny the importance
of ethics guidelines to regulate AI-based technologies given the
general concerns about its actual and potential effects. However,
scholars have started to share some doubts and criticisms about
their explicit or subtle limitations.
One line of argument questions the limits inherent in the
distance that a set of principles overlooks in terms of legitimacy
and application. In other words, skepticism stems from the
difficulties in translating principles and operational normative
tools, such as transparency or fairness, into concrete measures.
The most immediate concern is that these guidelines are
often hard to operationalize without the appropriate knowledge
regarding context of application of AI (Haas and Gießler,
2020). Furthermore, engineers and designers might lack adequate
training about the ethical aspects and implications of their
work (Hagendorff, 2020). Ethical principles rarely come with
detailed instructions. Crawford (2021) denounces the absence
of professional governance structures or standards that can
be followed.
Accordingly, scholars have highlighted that despite
widespread agreement about the necessity to follow ethical
regulations, measures like that of transparency are hardly
present in the actual operationalization of AI processes of private
companies (Article19, 2019). The reasons are identified again
in the supposedly deliberate abstractness and the innate lack of
accountability mechanisms in ethics (Hagendorff, 2020), which
may contribute to maintaining the adoption of ethical principles
as a means of avoiding public criticism (Wagner, 2018; Bietti,
2020).
The difficulty in applying ethical principles also raises
the question about the identification and selection of some
principles with respect to others. Indeed, the process that
leads to the selection of one set of principles over another
one is often unclear. However, it is possible to identify a
widespread tendency in the fact that most of the ethics
guidelines are the result of discussions among experts, involving
also private actors (e.g., European Commission, 2020), with
only a marginal role for civil society. One might wonder
then about the ethical and democratic legitimacy of such
choice of principles and the overall objectives that are meant
to facilitate.
The practical suspicions about the distance between intended
and effective objective of ethics guidelines leads us to a second
line of arguments which addresses the social epistemology of the
principles listed in these documents.
Beside the difficulty of translating aspects of justice into
technical commands, the intrinsic abstractness of principles can
overlook important contextual aspects as well. For instance, it
is possible that in certain domains specific ethics values will be
more salient than others or that the interpretation of values can
differ according to the socio-cultural traits of a given context.
Furthermore, the necessity to answer to some ethical principles
can clash with other needs or moral be those framed in terms of
the environment, labor rights, or equality.

fully predicted, suggesting that its epistemic unpredictability can
potentially mutate into an ontological shift.
Although there are different interpretations about the exact
reasons, it is evident that public and private bodies have tended
to embrace an approach which advocates for self-regulatory and
flexible approaches to the regulation of AI. According to the AI
Index Report4 , it is possible to identify over 100 ethics documents
that have been published between 2015 and 2020, with a recently
growing contribution of private organizations (Crawford, 2021,
pp. 223–224).
Amongst the different actors in charge of implementing AI
strategies, it is possible to identify a widespread consistency
about the ethical relevance of AI technology and systems.
At the public level, apart from the indications present in
national strategies, some of the most significant examples are
the requirements defined by the European Commission’s “Ethics
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI” (European Commission, 2020),
and the European Parliament’s resolution for AI, robotics and
related technologies5 Research organizations like the Institute
for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) have started
to design a set of indications for the “Ethically Aligned
Design” of AI that can suit different designers (IEEE, 2019).
Finally, the attempts made by private companies like Facebook6 ,
Google7 and Microsoft8 or the multi-stakeholder forum like
the Partnership on AI (PAI)9 confirm the great interest of
private actors to ensure the ethically sound development
of AI.
Although the number of documents is constantly increasing,
and the different values might appear variegated at first, in
their analyses of 84 documents, Jobin et al. (2019) have
identified several overlaps in the list of suggested values
and principles. The most common principles are those of
transparency (73), justice (68) and non-maleficence (60); the
less present ones are those of dignity (13) and solidarity
(6). Hagendorff (2020) has highlighted that concerns about
accountability, privacy and fairness are present in nearly 80%
of AI ethical guidelines. Although the specific terms might
be different, the concerns and principles seem to be very
similar. For example, the EU High-Level Expert Group on
the ethics of AI, have defined the profile of a trustworthy AI
according to four main principles: respect for human autonomy,
prevention of harm, fairness, and explicability. The OECD
identifies five complementary principles and tools, namely
sustainability, fairness, transparency, safety, and accountability.
Google is promoting a design process where AI systems
will avoid creating or reinforcing bias, be accountable and
safe, implement privacy by design methods, and strive to
be socially beneficial. Microsoft has chosen the six aspects

4 https://aiindex.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/2021-AI-Index-

Report-_Chapter-5.pdf
5 https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-9-2020-0275_EN.html
6 https://ai.facebook.com/blog/facebooks-five-pillars-of-responsible-ai/
7 https://ai.google/principles
8 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/responsible-ai?activetab=pivot1
%3aprimaryr6
9 https://partnershiponai.org

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

9

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

implement a responsible model of AI thanks to access to
information or through references to key aspects such as
transparency and fairness. However, this vision of ethics appears
reductive if put in relation to both a disruptive technological
apparatus such as AI, and if placed in pluralistic value
and normative contexts. The model of man underlying the
ethics guidelines seems isolated and endowed with rational
capacities that need only be activated. What is missing, in our
opinion, are references to shared practices for understanding
and selecting the values that are required to make AI a
responsible technology.
Secondly, from a political and democratic perspective the
lack of public scrutiny sheds a grim light on the legitimacy
of the ethics guidelines because of the apparent arbitrariness
of their selection. Accordingly, ethics guidelines for instance
tend to leave aside the question of power in our societies and
the consequent necessity to democratically open the space of
discussion (Wagner, 2018; Bietti, 2020).
The conceptual framework through which we have carried
out our analysis, places very strong emphasis on the connections
between the ethical and political dimensions in the development
of individual freedoms. The pragmatist model in fact indicates
the possibility for an agent to realize his or herself in the ability
that an institutional system offers to take an active part in
social problem-solving practices. The basic assumption is that an
individual does not live in isolation but, on the contrary, his or
her successful self-realization occurs through his or her insertion
within a social context where he or she can meaningfully take
part in interactions of different kinds. In this sense, an ethical
approach is to be understood as the possibility of interacting
in democratic forms with other members of a given context.
Democracy and ethics are in this sense closely intertwined in an
attitude that John Dewey called a way of life.
In the next section we will define more in detail the features
and the advantages of such theoretical framework.

This line of argument helps us by unveiling the epistemic
assumptions at the basis of current ethics guidelines. A
common trait of these documents seems to be the process
of identification and selection of a set of potentially universal
principles that everyone can agree upon without an adequate
reflection on their translation. Operational normative principles
such as transparency, accountability are conceptually hard to
reject when evaluating the ethical respondence of technical
processes. The overall underlying argument highlights a tendency
to consider principles, normative tools and requirements
independently from their context of application, overlooking
that the implementation of AI takes place in different sociotechnical environments.
AI, like all technologies, is not independent of its sociocultural background. Instead, the development of its various
features is dependent partially on different situated scenarios
in which it is deployed. Even a technically refined design
of AI can hardly determine all of its potential usages prior
to deployment to an external environment. Because of this
context-specificity of potential AI functions, the autonomy of
self-learning technologies often develops in ways that are not
entirely predictable.
A clear example of the gap between acceptable principles and
their contextual acceptance is expressed by the most recurring
principle of ethics guidelines for AI, transparency. Transparency
appears intuitively beneficial for increasing ethical compliance
as it allows external actors to evaluate the appropriateness of
a process. However, Ananny and Crawford (2016) have argued
that the operational normative principle of transparency is
severely limited for regulating algorithmic systems. The implicit
misunderstanding is that AI consists of an algorithm that can
be evaluated on paper beforehand. However, an algorithm is
often not a fixed, isolated code but a relational assemblage of
human and non-human factors like institutions, norms, and
practices (Ananny, 2016; Fazelpour and Lipton, 2020). The
possibility to see parts of the process does not necessarily entail
the capacity to understand how the system works, because
learning requires a dynamic interaction with the systems within
a specific environment (Resnick et al., 2000). On a similar
note, one might also wonder how realistic is to implement
mechanisms of accountability, another protagonist of ethics
guidelines, in a process that is by definition handled by multiple
actors over a long period of time, and with a significant role
of autonomous algorithms for which current regulations is still
under consideration.
To summarize, ethics guidelines can be considered beneficial
for the fact that they are a clear cornerstone in seeking to provide
answers and solutions to some of the main concerns about the
unintended effects of AI systems. They address controversial
aspects in a contextual and therefore flexible way. However,
guidelines may fall short in doing so if their relationship with
socio-technical environments is disregarded by the adoption
of abstract principles that have not been made object of
public scrutiny.
Firstly, from an ethical and epistemological point of view,
the basic assumption that characterizes most ethics guidelines
seems to concern an abstract or ideal individual able to

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

FROM THE ETHICS OF AI TO THE
POLITICS OF AI: THE NEED FOR A MORE
DEMOCRATIC APPROACH
Finding or creating an appropriate framework for AI governance
is particularly challenging because of its nature as a strategic
level multi- or omni-use technology (Saran et al., 2018) which
raises issues in terms of their viability and adaptability in the
face of rapid technological developments (Liu et al., 2020, p.
2). Moreover, the multi-level extension of AI as a national
asset embedded in global interactions makes it comparable
to revolutionary technologies like steam power and electricity
(Trajtenberg, 2018).
Indeed, the issue of AI governance is conditioned by the
broader public concerns about the positive benefits and risks of
AI development and deployment. The role of governments in
AI governance has focused on managing the potential negative
externalities of AI development and deployment in the private
sector in order to safeguard societal cohesion and values such
as safety (Ulnicane et al., 2020, pp. 166–167). However, as noted

10

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

AI technology through the lens of deliberative and democratic
politics could provide new possibilities for a more societally
oriented AI.
In order to translate the necessity of establishing a framework
that can aspire to obtain a balance between the necessary
efficiency of the process with its legitimacy, we believe that we
need to adopt a methodology that can increase the role of society
in a scientific way. A promising methodology to respond to these
needs is the one inspired by John Dewey’s pragmatism, which has
recently regained momentum because of its advantages to deal
with technological progress in democratic ways.

earlier, most attention around AI development and deployment
has focused on the “ethical framing” of AI technology (Ulnicane
et al., 2020, p. 161), whereas less emphasis has been given on
the “political” or “democratic” framings of AI. The problem in
terms of governance is that ethical frameworks and principles
lack mechanisms to implement societally desired normative goals
(Ulnicane et al., 2021, p. 77), because they do not address
fundamental questions of political power structures (Misuraca
and Van Noordt, 2020, p. 50).
Another problem in AI governance has been the closed nature
of the development of AI technology, which has resulted in
power imbalances and various biases (Crawford and Whittaker,
2016). As mentioned earlier, rhetorical gestures and references
toward public engagement are common, but there is little
concrete evidence of mechanisms aiming for increased civil
society participation in AI governance (Wilson, 2022). Instead,
the public is demoted to a passive user of AI technology or as the
recipient of various government activities, communications, and
services, thus framing AI as a depoliticized technology.
Scholars such as Jasanoff (2016) deny the idea of AI as a
non-political technology by arguing that technological solutions
and choices are always political in nature. Indeed, there has
been an increasing emphasis in the literature for substantial
societal inquiry, public engagement practices, diverse stakeholder
inclusion, participatory mechanisms in AI development and
governance (Ulnicane et al., 2020, 2021; Wilson, 2022). During
the last decade, governance frameworks have tended to assume
an increasingly reflexive and collaborative posture. De Schutter
and Lenoble (2010) for instance argue that governance models
should tend toward learning opportunities for the actors
involved. Learning could assume the form of benchmarking
of best practices, monitoring and evaluation, participation and
consultation notwithstanding that all these tools have become
central aspects of main governance theories. Furthermore, given
the fast pace at which technological progress and its transversal
application to plural societies happen, it appears important to
adopt a governance theoretical model that can benefit from a
strong flexibility in terms of context and plurality of knowledge
and values.
The integration of AI into society is a substantial societal and
political question, which requires a thorough deliberation on the
fundamental questions around AI. It is thus important to pay
attention to the ways in which existing governance approaches
provide room for or limit democratic and societal inputs to
AI governance. In particular, long-term perspectives such as
imaginaries and future narratives can either limit or broaden
democratic participation. In order to take into account the role of
civil society in AI development, the processes of AI development
and deployment should be further democratized. The responsible
development of AI governance requires more human agency
and the democratization of the political imagination (Jasanoff,
2016). The inclusion of broader civil society would open the field
of future imaginaries for more people, giving an opportunity
to shape questions of power and influence. The focus should
not be solely on the experts who are developing AI technology,
but rather on the level of the end-users and citizens who have
to deal with the impacts of AI systems (Veale, 2020). Framing

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

A Cooperative Reflexive Governance
Theory
In order to overcome the limits embedded in current regulatory
policies we need to adopt a theoretical model of governance
that can overcome the limitation of current ethical guidelines,
namely arbitrariness, abstractness, and power asymmetries
by strengthening collaborative processes. If Stoker (1998)
defines governance as an operation that could not be done
by actors independently, we believe that governance is an
operation that should not be done outside of a cooperative
framework. Although we are aware of the existing asymmetries
present in terms of knowledge, we argue that their current
negative effects can be mitigated through the integration of
processes of social experimentation in the overall regulatory
framework of AI. In order to do so we need to establish
a cooperative approach across different social groups based
on reciprocal learning. A promising framework to translate
these theoretical assumptions into a concrete model are those
advocated in different ways by scholars orbiting around the
pragmatist tradition.
In the Public and its Problems (1991) John Dewey portrayed
a picture of the state of health of democracies in relation to the
impact of science and technology that is extraordinarily relevant
today. Concerned by the discredit experienced by democracy,
mostly caused by the effects of technological and economic
changes on society, he investigated the reasons and provided
a methodological suggestion to address it. The pace at which
economic and technological changes occurred in democratic
societies was so fast that they lost sight of their societal nature,
responding to technical or sectorial imperatives. In fact, in order
for social changes, emerging in the technological or economic
sector for instance, to assume the dignity of progresses, Dewey
believed that they needed to represent an answer to societal
claims and needs, and not just to fulfill criteria of technical
efficiency or profitability. Accordingly, progress for Dewey was
represented by the capacity of scientific and technological
innovations to favor moral flourishing in individuals as part of
a community.
The problem for Dewey was basically that of an
epistemic reductionism that was instrumental to maintaining
power asymmetries.
It is surprising how topical and similar Dewey’s critique
of the allegedly determinist approach to science is to the
limits we have found in the current management of AI.

11

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

and consequently arbitrariness. The abstractness can be avoided
through a method of inquiry that would put under scrutiny any
assumptions emerging from social tensions. This in consequence
would generate a facility, a habit to scrutinize different aspects
of a particular phenomena together with other individuals
through processes of deliberation and cooperation. Dewey
was convinced that a more receptive attitude toward social
perspectives would increasingly raise the common awareness
of the interconnection and equal importance of the different
social spheres.
The solution Dewey proposed was to explore ways to extend
the scientific method of inquiry to all aspects of associated life in a
democratic way. Associations are necessary to the functioning of
societies. But, in order to make those associations meaningful for
the fulfillment of moral principles proper of democratic systems,
individuals should be able to develop an awareness about their
purposes and their historical adequacy. This shift from having
an impersonal role in the overall division of labor, to becoming
aware of our own role as members of a community, should be
established through reciprocal communication and publicity of
discussion with scientists and policy-makers.
The overall result that can be obtained through these
two aspects takes the form of that method of democratic
experimentation known as social inquiry, which must extend
its functions to all areas of associated life and thus take on the
guise of an ethical way of life where everyone participates and
contributes to common challenges (Honneth, 1998; Bernstein,
2010, ch. 3).
Accordingly, throughout the years Dewey formulated and
described his method of social inquiry that can represent
a fertile solution for abandoning what he defined objective
approaches to ethics and reductive democratic theories in favor
of democratic experimentalism (Dewey, 1990).
This method involves two main underlying factors. The first
one is that all the theoretical aspects necessary to any systematic
knowledge should be “shaped and tested as tool of inquiry.” The
second factor is that policies for social action should “be treated
as working hypotheses, not as programs to be rigidly adhered
to and executed.” On the contrary, Dewey was firmly convinced
that social policies should be subjected to constant scrutiny once
applied and be easily changeable/adapted.
More specifically the method of social inquiry consists of
different steps which should be understood as part of an on-going
process of experimentation (Kolb, 2015). The triggering factor
for social inquiry is the emerging incapacity of individuals to deal
with aspects of their social interactions and the quest for a change
(Mead, 2020). Usually, when this societal sufferance persists
or is particularly widespread in society it implies that existing
institutions are not perceived as able or willing to respond to
these claims (Marres, 2007). Accordingly, the first step of a social
inquiry is the recognition of a problem, its indeterminacy and the
subsequent formation of a public requesting action.
The second step in the process of inquiry is the scientific
formulation of the problem which requires an analysis of the
different factors at stake, holistic and plural, and the potential
causes of the problem through a communicative process amongst
those who are concerned (Dewey, LW 12).

Like the criticisms that have recently questioned the uptake
of AI, Dewey identified the the abstractness of regulatory
frameworks as the main cause responsible for incapacity
of democratic systems to integrate technology through a
social perspective. At the time when Dewey wrote his
masterpiece, democracies were legitimized by references to
abstract principles. If their moral value was hardly questionable,
the possibility of their translation became more difficult
in light of social contexts that were increasingly plural
and multifaceted. As these principles were abstract and the
object of what Dewey called a metaphysical approach, they
were not questioned and often served to preserve power
relations that despite their presumptions, were far from being
universally acceptable. justification necessary to institutionalize
any change in society, was identified in universal and supposedly
neutral principles.
Dewey believed that such abstractness was partly instrumental
in order to favor groups in power or political representatives.
All fields of knowledge suffered, according to Dewey, from
a technocratic or oligopolistic approach, whereby assumptions
and policies were determined by a small group of people on
the basis of sectorial references and interests. Abstractness and
arbitrariness were then mutually reinforcing each other to the
detriment of democratic engagement.
According to Dewey, this reductionist perspective affected the
general understanding of democracy. If in terms of contents
its principles were relegated to an undisputable set of moral
ideals detached from social reality, methodologically, democratic
processes were reduced to a simple exercise of expressing a
preference during political elections. Neither was democracy
implemented according to more significant interactions like
deliberation, nor was it extended to domains other than politics
like science, work or education.
For Dewey, the potential solution to this reductionism resided
in science itself and the great contribution of science to humanity,
namely in its experimental methodology. By experimenting and
evaluating the validity of assumptions in practice, science had
been able to generate enormous progress in natural sciences.
However, this fertile methodology had not been integrated into
other equally important fields of associated life. It was surprising
for Dewey to notice that experimental approaches had not
been applied to ethical theories or democratic approaches. He
identified a double effect of such reductionism in terms of
deliberation and cooperation. On the one hand, individuals
did not develop the habit of deliberative exchanges, which
reinforced social fragmentation, isolation and political mistrust.
On the other hand, by overshadowing the advantages of societal
cooperation, it weakened the awareness in the population that
democratic scrutiny could and should have been extended to
other fields of associated life.
Now, Dewey tells us that the situation does not have to
remain as it is, but in order to change it, one cannot think
of remaining within the same democratic method with its
outdated and limited assumptions. Dewey responded to these
ethical and epistemic deficits by proposing an experimentalist
democratic model of a scientific and social nature. Dewey’s
aim was to propose a method that could overcome abstractness

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

12

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

assuming these three conditions we can obtain for example the
following advantages:

The third step is the formulation of hypotheses, ideas and
ways forward to address the problem (LW 8, p. 203). Here the
possibilities for the adequate formulation of a working hypothesis
often depends on different scientific methodologies but also on
the specific field of application. This part of the process builds
on the necessary creativity of actors involved as one of the main
factors of social inquiry.
The fourth step is the consideration about the context in which
these actions are going be implemented. This is a crucial aspect
of democratic experimentalism as it aims at integrating a whole
set of conditions that are usually excluded by objective types of
ethics. Although Dewey’s method is strongly oriented toward
change, he is firm in highlighting that experience does not happen
in a void but in a context (Dewey, 1991; LW, 13, pp. 1–62).
Every experience is the combination of psychological and
social factors that are specific to a context. And the context
is also the result of a series of values, standards and cultural
features that we have inherited, in which we were raised, and
that contribute to form our habits. As argued by Cefaï (2020),
ethics entertains a deep relation with psychology and sociology
for it addresses the relation between the character, habits,
motivations and dispositions of individuals, as well as the social
and technological conditions in which they live. This particular
attention to experience as experience of life implies that in order
to be able to set forth viable and meaningful solutions, the
processes of reflection and deliberation cannot prescind from
existing dynamics of power as well as a realistic understanding
of feasible solutions (Mead, 2020).
The learning aspect that this step entails for individuals is
expressed by the pragmatists belief that personal identity is not
innate but the result of a socialization (Zimmermann, 2020).
By reflecting about the context in which they are called to act
upon the individuals can also learn more about themselves as
part of a society. By wanting and being able to transform society,
individuals also transform themselves (Cefaï, 2020).
The last step of this process of social inquiry focuses on the
active contextualization of some actions that will provide the
material for the evaluation of previous hypotheses. Integration
into a specific context is the only way to understand if specific
policies or action function for the purposes for which they have
been selected (Lenoble and Maesschalck, 2016)
This methodology of experimentation depends on
three main assumptions that it develops through a social,
experimental and public framework. First, it must be
social in the sense that different drivers, different actors as
well as different aspects of experience can be considered,
confronted and valued in the analysis and evaluation of
outcomes. Plurality, diversity and complexity should be
integrated under the common social objective of all modes
of organization, which was for Dewey the core moral
aspect of democratic experimentation. Second, it must be
experimental in nature, meaning that the whole method
should be open for scrutiny without predetermining its
assumptions or its outcomes (LW 11, p. 292–93; cp. LW 8,
p. 206). Third, it should be public in its outcomes enabling
other members of society to learn and to build a sense of
trust and acceptance of the process. According to Dewey by

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

- We can raise the awareness about the interconnections across
different modes of associations that a just division of labor
should entail in terms of objectives.
- We can unveil the asymmetries of power present in society
- We can trigger a process of learning that can give back
to individuals a meaning of being part of a society by
understanding their role and value.
- We can increase the democratic level of our societies by
strengthening the involved participants in the process, but
also by questioning democracy as an experimental process of
social inquiry.
Although this theoretical model is experimental and needs to be
operationalized to verify its value, it is possible to identify an
increasing use of approaches based on this model that appear
promising. Examples of the application of “social inquiries” can
be found in many fields where research and innovation are
intertwined with ethical and social aspects10 .

DISCUSSION
One of the recognized problems in AI development and
deployment is the relatively narrow nature of the process.
Because the national AI strategies are largely shaped
by geopolitical, economic and scientific-technological
considerations, they tend to emphasize the importance of
Triple-Helix partnerships between government, industry and
academia, as well as hybrid governance approaches in developing
and deploying AI systems, whereas the role of civil society
stakeholders is often overlooked. These “locked-in” and “pathdependent” visions of AI utilization can limit the space for
democratic imagination of AI futures (Bareis and Katzenbach,
2021, pp. 21,22). Indeed, the public has not been able to actively
engage with the design, development and deployment of AI
technology (Crawford and Whittaker, 2016). On the contrary,
the national strategies tend to emphasize the imperative of
adapting societies to the needs of the new AI-driven economy.
Similarly, the issue of societal trust is often framed in the
strategies as an instrumental value that ensures the integration
of AI systems into society, and not its precondition. In sum, the
current framing of AI technology narrows the discussion around
AI toward technical and technocratic fixes (Misuraca and Van
Noordt, 2020, pp. 49–50) and draws attention away from existing
structural problems and their root causes, which often have a
profound effect on the development and use of AI (Ulnicane
et al., 2020, p. 171).
The general reliance on ethics guidelines does not appear
sufficient to deal with the significant impacts that AI-based
technologies will generate. Ethics guidelines are built on a sort
of epistemological optimism that overlooks a series of contextual
aspects that are fundamental in dealing with the dynamic nature
of AI. Furthermore, ethics guidelines tend to divert the attention
10 For an example of the application of such methodology, see https://newhorrizon.
eu/social-labs/.

13

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

needs. In other words, as AI continues to have a radical influence
on the development of our democratic societies, it is important
to point out the lack of broader participatory processes around
AI governance.
In this sense, the purpose of this paper was twofold.
On the one hand, we highlighted the limits of the current
approaches to AI governance by showing their distance from
the public and society at large. On the other hand, we
provided a conceptual framework that could go beyond these
limits without losing the economic and strategic potential that
AI represents for any socio-political context. Through the
theoretical model developed by John Dewey, we have highlighted
the benefits of a participatory and experimental approach
to the governance of AI. Accordingly, the innovativeness of
our theoretical model resides in its suggestion to extend an
experimental method to the domains of politics and ethics of
technology. In so doing, our approach offers the advantage
of strengthening the legitimacy of AI-related policies but
also their effectiveness because they are enriched by the
cement that results from increased interaction with the civil
society. Finally, our proposal can contribute to the habit of a
broad dialogue among citizens, thus improving the health of
democratic systems.

from the necessity to form and include different publics in the
definition of AI’s role for our future societies.
The solution proposed by scholars like Dewey has the double
advantage of representing a powerful tool to diagnose the
health of our democratic systems in addition to being able to
hold together the different societal perspectives concerning the
emergence of disruptive technologies such as AI. In this sense
his criticism about a reductive and metaphysical perspective
on the ethos of democratic life appears highly relevant when
applied to the analysis of the governance of AI. Moreover, it
also represents a fruitful approach toward addressing the limits
of current theoretical models by offering an empirical and open
methodology, which aims to strengthen the role of society in
shaping our future.

CONCLUSION
Over the past decade AI has become one of the most important
but also one of the most controversial technologies due to
the unpredictability of its developments and applications. It is
hard to find a sector today where AI-systems of some variety
would not represent the main technical tool for data collection
and management. Its increasing importance has led various
public and private actors to define strategic guidelines for its
development in the space of a few years.
Among the various aspects that governments seem to have
considered, there is a strong preponderance of the economic
and geopolitical imperatives. However, awareness of the potential
side effects of AI has forced the various public and private
bodies to adopt ethical guidelines to prevent or mitigate the
negative externalities of AI. In this sense, the production of
hundreds of AI-related policy documents in a short period of
time testifies to this urgency but also to the fragmentation and
the absence of larger democratic processes in the selection of
ethical principles. The evident absence of concrete references
to the role of civil society in the discussion on the objectives
and necessary limits of AI raises questions in terms of the
adequacy of these ethical guidelines. Indeed, although most of the
ethical principles are difficult to contest as such, they can appear
abstract if not sometimes arbitrary when they are not supported
by broader deliberations. More importantly, the application of
ethical principles in concrete contexts is certainly more difficult
than is often presented to be the case. This also raises questions
about the effectiveness of ethical guidelines in terms of their
ability to provide responsive action and solutions to various social

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author/s.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual
contribution to the work and approved it for publication. The
order of the writers reflects the relative contribution of the
authors in the text.

FUNDING
The RG acknowledges that the research has received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under Grant Agreement 962547. The SL
and MN wish to acknowledge the project Ethical AI for the
Governance of the Society (ETAIROS, grant number 327356),
funded by the Strategic Research Council at the Academy
of Finland.

REFERENCES

Ananny, M., and Crawford, K. (2016). Seeing without knowing: Limitations of the
transparency ideal and its application to algorithmic accountability. New Media
Soc. 20, 973–989. doi: 10.1177/1461444816676645
Article19 (2019). Governance With Teeth: How Human Rights Can Strengthen
FAT and Ethics Initiatives on Artificial Intelligence. Available online at: https://
www.article19.org/resources/governance-with-teeth-how-human-rightscan-strengthen-fat-and-ethics-initiatives-on-artificial-intelligence/ (accessed
February 1, 2022).
Bannister, F., and Connolly, R. (2020). Administration by algorithm: a risk
management framework. Inform. Polity, 25, 471–490. doi: 10.3233/IP-200249

Allen, G. (2019). Understanding China’s AI Strategy: Clues to Chinese Strategic
Thinking on Artificial Intelligence and National Security. Center for a New
American Security. Available online at: https://s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.
com/files.cnas.org/documents/CNAS-Understanding-Chinas-AI-StrategyGregory-C.-Allen-FINAL-2.15.19.pdf?mtime=20190215104041&focal=none
Ananny, M. (2016). Towards an ethics of algorithms: convening, observation,
probability, and timeliness. Sci. Technol. Human Values 41, 93-117.
doi: 10.1177/0162243915606523

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

14

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

De Schutter, O., and Lenoble, J. (2010). Reflexive Governance: Redefining the Public
Interest in a Pluralistic World. Oxford: Hart.
de Sousa, W. G., de Melo, E. R. P., De Souza Bermejo, P. H., Sousa Farias, R. A.,
and Gomes, A. O. (2019). How and where is artificial intelligence in the public
sector going? A literature review and research agenda. Govern. Inform. Q. 36,
0740-624. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2019.07.004
Delacroix, S., and Wagner, B. (2021). Constructing a mutually supportive
interface between ethics and regulation. Comput. Law Secur. Rev. 40, 520.
doi: 10.1016/j.clsr.2020.105520
Denmark (2019). “National strategy for artificial intelligence,” in Ministry
of Finance and Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial Affairs.
Available online at: https://en.digst.dk/media/19337/305755_gb_version_finala.pdf (accessed February 1, 2022).
Dewey, J. (1990). The Later Works of John Dewey, 1924–1953. Carbondale, Ill.:
Southern Illinois University Press.
Dewey, J. (1991). The Public and its Problems. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press
- Swallow Press.
Dexe, J., and Franke, U. (2020). Nordic lights? National AI policies for doing well
by doing good. J. Cyber Policy 5, 332–349. doi: 10.1080/23738871.2020.1856160
Dignam, A. (2020). Artificial intelligence, tech corporate governance and the
public interest regulatory response. Cambridge J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 13, 37–54.
doi: 10.1093/cjres/rsaa002
Dutton, T. (2018). Building an AI world: Report on national and regional
strategies. CIFAR. Available online at: https://www.cifar.ca/cifarnews/2018/
12/06/building-an-ai-world-report-on-national-and-regional-ai-strategies
(accessed December 6, 2018).
European Commission (2020). High-Level Expert Group on AI. Ethics Guidelines
for Trustworthy AI. Brussels: Shaping Europe’s digital future. Available
online
at:
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethicsguidelines-trustworthy-ai (accessed February 1, 2022).
Fatima, S., Desouza, K. C., and Dawson, G. S. (2020). National strategic
artificial intelligence plans: A multi-dimensional analysis. Econ. Anal. Policy 67,
178–194. doi: 10.1016/j.eap.2020.07.008
Fatima, S., Desouza, K. C., Denford, J. S., and Dawson, G. S. (2021).
What explains governments interest in artificial intelligence? A signaling
theory approach. Econ. Anal. Polic. 71, 238–254. doi: 10.1016/j.eap.2021.
05.001
Fazelpour, S., and Lipton, Z. C. (2020). Algorithmic Fairness From a Non-Ideal
Perspective. London: Scopus, pp. 57–63.
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand, P., Dignum, V.,
et al. (2018). AI4People— An ethical framework for a good AI society:
opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Minds Mach. 28,
689–707. doi: 10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5
Future of Life (2020). Future of Life. National and International AI Strategies.
Future of Life Institute. Available online at: https://futureoflife.org/nationalinternational-ai-strategies/
Germany (2018). “Federal Government’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy,” in Federal
Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, Federal Ministry of Education and
Research and Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. Available online
at: https://www.de.digital/DIGITAL/Redaktion/EN/Standardartikel/artificialintelligence-strategy.html (accessed February 1, 2022).
Green, B., and Chen, Y. (2019). “Disparate interactions: an algorithm-in-theloop analysis of fairness in risk assessments,” in Proceedings of the Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency—FAT∗ ’19, 90–99. Atlanta, GA:
ACM Press.
Haas, L., and Gießler, S. (2020). AI Ethics Global Inventory. Available online
at: https://inventory.algorithmwatch.org/
Hagendorff, T. (2020). The Ethics of AI Ethics: an evaluation of guidelines. Minds
Mach. 30, 99–120, doi: 10.1007/s11023-020-09517-8
Hague, D. (2019). Benefits, pitfalls, and potential bias in health care AI. C Med J.
80, 219–223. doi: 10.18043/ncm.80.4.219
Honneth,
A.
(1998).
Democracy
as
reflexive
cooperation.
Politic.
Theory
26,
763–783.
doi:
10.1177/00905917980260
06001
IEEE. (2019) “Ethically aligned design,” in A Vision for Prioritizing Human
Well-being with Autonomous and Intelligent Systems (IEEE). Available
online at: https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieee-standards/standards/
web/documents/other/ead1e.pdf (accessed February 2, 2022).

Bareis, J., and Katzenbach, C. (2021). Talking AI into being: the narratives
and imaginaries of national AI strategies and their performative
politics. Sci. Technol. Human Values. 21, 7. doi: 10.1177/016224392110
30007
Beckert, J. (2016). Imagined Futures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bennett, B., and Daly, A. (2020). Recognising rights for robots:
Can we? Will we? Should we? Law Innov. Technol. 12, 60–80.
doi: 10.1080/17579961.2020.1727063
Benthall, S., and Hynes, B. (2019). FAT∗ ’19: Proceedings of the Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, January 2019, pp. 289–298
Bernstein, R. (2010). The Pragmatic Turn. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Berryhill, J., Heang, K. K., Clogher, R., and McBride, K. (2019). “Hello, World:
Artificial intelligence and its use in the public sector,” in OECD Working Papers
on Public Governance (Paris: OECD Publishing), p. 36.
Bietti, E. (2020). “From ethics washing to ethics bashing,” in FAT∗ ’20: Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, (Spain:
Barcelona), p. 10.
Bradley, C., and Wingfield, R. (2020). National Artificial Intelligence Strategies
and Human Rights: A Review. Global Digital Policy Incubator. Available
online at: https://www.gp-digital.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/NationalArtifical-Intelligence-Strategies-and-Human-Rights--A-Review_April2020.
pdf (accessed February 1, 2022).
Buhmann, A., and Fieseler,. C. (2021). Towards a deliberative framework for
responsible innovation in artificial intelligence. Technol. Society 64, 101475.
doi: 10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101475
Calvo R. A., Peters D., Vold K., and Ryan R. M. (2020). "Supporting human
autonomy in AI systems: A framework for ethical enquiry," in Ethics of Digital
Well-Being: A Multidisciplinary Approach, eds C. Burr and L. Floridi (Cham:
Springer), 31–54. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-50585-1_2
Campolo, A., and Crawford, K. (2020). Enchanted determinism: power without
responsibility in artificial intelligence. Engaging Sci. Technol. Soc. 6, 1–19.
doi: 10.17351/ests2020.277
Cath, C. (2018). Governing artificial intelligence: ethical, legal and
technical opportunities and challenges. Philosophic. Trans. 18, 376.
doi: 10.1098/rsta.2018.0080
Cath, C., Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., Taddeo, M., and Floridi, L. (2018). Artificial
Intelligence and the ‘good society’: The US, EU, and UK approach. Sci. Eng.
Ethics 24, 505–528. doi: 10.1007/s11948-017-9901-7
Cave, S., ÓhÉigeartaigh, S. (2018). “An AI race for strategic advantage: rhetoric
and risks,” in Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
Society (AIES ’18) (New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery),
pp. 36–40.
Cefaï, D. (2020). La naissance de l’experimentation démocratique quelques
hypothèses de travail du pragmatisme. Pragmata 3, 270–355. Available
online at: https://revuepragmata.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/pragmata-20203-7-cefai.pdf (accessed February 1, 2022).
China (2017). “Next Generation AI Development Plan,” in State Council of the
People’s Republic of China. Available online at: https://chinacopyrightandmedia.
wordpress.com/2017/07/20/a-next-generation-artificial-intelligencedevelopment-plan/ (accessed February 1, 2022).
Clarke, R. (2019). Regulatory alternatives for AI. Comput. Law Secur. Rev. 35,
398–409. doi: 10.1016/j.clsr.2019.04.008
Crawford, K. (2021). The Atlas of AI. New Haven and London: Yale
University Press.
Crawford, K., and Whittaker, M. (2016). The AI Now Report. The Social and
Economic Implications of Artificial Intelligence Technologies in the NearTerm. New York, NY: AI Now Institute.
Dafoe, A. (2018). AI Governance: A Research Agenda. Governance of AI
Program. Future of Humanity Institute. University of Oxford: Oxford,
UK. Available online at: https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/GovAIAgenda.pdf (accessed December 1, 2021).
de Almeida, P. G. R., dos Santos, C. D., and Farias, J. S. (2021). Artificial
Intelligence Regulation: a framework for governance. Ethics Inform. Technol.
23, 505–525. doi: 10.1007/s10676-021-09593-z
de Reuver, M., van Wynsberghe, A., Janssen, M., and van de Poel, I. (2020).
Digital platforms and responsible innovation: expanding value sensitive design
to overcome ontological uncertainty. Ethics Inform. Technol. 22, 257–267.
doi: 10.1007/s10676-020-09537-z

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

15

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

Russia (2019). “Decree of the President of the Russian Federation on the Development
of Artificial Intelligence in the Russian Federation”. President of the Russian
Federation. Available online at: https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/
decree-of-the-president-of-the-russian-federation-on-the-development-ofartificial-intelligence-in-the-russian-federation/ (accessed February 1, 2022).
Saariluoma, P., and Salo-Pöntinen, H. (2021). “Lost people: how national
ai-strategies paying attention to users,” in Human Interaction, Emerging
Technologies and Future Applications IV. IHIET-AI 2021. Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing, eds Ahram T., Taiar R., Groff F. (Cham:
Springer), p. 75.
Saran, S., Natarajan, N., and Srikumar, M. (2018). In Pursuit of Autonomy: AI and
National Strategies. November 2018. Observer Research Foundation. Available
online at: https://orfonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Ai_Book.pdf
Saveliev, A., and Zhurenkov, D. (2021). Artificial intelligence and
social responsibility: the case of the artificial intelligence strategies
in the United States, Russia, and China. Kybernetes 50, 656–675.
doi: 10.1108/K-01-2020-0060
Sigfrids, A., Nieminen, M., Leikas, J., and Pikkuaho, P. (2022). How should public
administrations support ethical and sustainable development and use of Artificial
Intelligence? A systematic review of proposals for developing governance of AI.
Unpublished manuscript.
Singapore (2017). “AI Singapore”. Smart Nation and Digital Government Office.
Available online at: https://www.nrf.gov.sg/programmes/artificial-intelligencer-d-programme (accessed February 1, 2022).
Smith, M. (2018). Getting value from artificial intelligence in agriculture. Anim.
Product. Sci. 60, 46–54, doi: 10.1071/AN18522
Stix, C. (2021). Actionable principles for artificial intelligence policy: three
pathways. Sci. Eng. Ethics 27, 1–17. doi: 10.1007/s11948-020-00277-3
Stoker, G. (1998). Governance as theory: five propositions. Int. Soc. Sci. J. 50, 17–28.
doi: 10.1111/1468-2451.00106
Sun, T. Q., and Medaglia, R. (2019). Mapping the challenges of Artificial
Intelligence in the public sector: evidence from public healthcare. Gov. Inform.
Q. 36, 368–383. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2018.09.008
Taeihagh, A. (2021): Governance of artificial intelligence. Policy Soc. 40, 137–157,
doi: 10.1080/14494035.2021.1928377
Toll, D., Lindgren, I., Melin, U., and Madsen, C.Ø. (2019). Artificial Intelligence in
Swedish Policies: Values, Benefits, Considerations and Risks.
Trajtenberg, M. (2018). AI as the Next Gpt: A Political-Economy Perspective.
NBER Working Paper No. w24245. Available online at: http://www.nber.org/
papers/w24245 (accessed February 1, 2022).
Tsamados, A., Aggarwal, N., Cowls, J., Morley, J., Roberts, H., Taddeo, M., et al.
(2021). The ethics of algorithms: key problems and solutions. AI Soc. 21, 302.
doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3662302
Ulnicane, I., Eke, D. O., Knight, W., Ogoh, G., and Stahl, B. C. (2021).
Good governance as a response to discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons for
AI from other emerging technologies. Interdisciplin. Sci. Rev. 46, 71–93.
doi: 10.1080/03080188.2020.1840220
Ulnicane, I., Knight, W., Leach, T., Stahl, B. C., and Wanjiku, W. G. (2020).
Framing governance for a contested emerging technology: insights from AI
policy. Policy Soc. 40, 158–177. doi: 10.1080/14494035.2020.1855800
United Kingdom (2018). “Artificial intelligence sector deal,” in Office for
Artificial Intelligence; Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
and Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. Available online
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/artificial-intelligence-sectordeal/ai-sector-deal (accessed February 1, 2022).
United States (2019). “Executive order on maintaining American leadership
in artificial intelligence,” in US President Donald Trump. Available online
at:
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/executiveorder-maintaining-american-leadership-artificial-intelligence/
(accessed
February 1, 2022).
Uruguay (2019). “Artificial intelligence strategy for the digital government,”
in Office of the President. Available online at: https://www.gub.uy/agenciagobierno-electronico-sociedad-informacion-conocimiento/comunicacion/
publicaciones/ia-strategy-english-version/ia-strategy-english-version
(accessed February 1, 2022).
Van Roy, V., Rossetti, F., Perset, K., and Galindo-Romero, L. (2021). AI
Watch - National strategies on Artificial Intelligence: A European perspective.
Luxembourg: EUR 30745 EN, Publications Office of the European Union.

Japan (2019). “AI Strategy 2019”. Artificial Intelligence Technology Strategy
Council. Available online at: https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/ai_senryaku/
pdf/aistratagy2019en.pdf (accessed February 1, 2022).
Jasanoff, S. (2016). The Ethics of Invention: Technology and the Human
Future. New York: W.W. Norton.
Jasanoff, S., and Kim, S-H. (2009). Containing the atom: sociotechnical imaginaries
and nuclear power in the United States and South Korea. Minerva 47, 119.
doi: 10.1007/s11024-009-9124-4
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., and Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape of AI ethics
guidelines. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 389–399. doi: 10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2
Johnson, R., Stone, D., and Lukaszewski, K. (2020). The benefits of eHRM and AI
for talent acquisition. J. Tour. Fut. 7, 13 doi: 10.1108/JTF-02-2020-0013
Koehler, J. (2018). Business Process Innovation with Artificial Intelligence:
Levering Benefits and Controlling Operational Risks. Euro. Bus. Manage. 4,
55–66. doi: 10.11648/j.ebm.20180402.12
Kolb, D. A. (2015). “Experiential learning,” in Experience as the Source of Learning
and Development, 2nd Edn (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education).
Kuziemski, M., and Misuraca, G. (2020). AI governance in the public sector: three
tales from the frontiers of automated decision-making in democratic settings.
Telecommun. Policy, 44, 76. doi: 10.1016/j.telpol.2020.101976
Lazic, L. (2019). “Benefit from AI in cybersecurity,” in The 11th International
Conference on Business Information Security (BISEC-2019).
Lenoble, J., and Maesschalck, M. (2016). Democracy, Law and Governance. London
and New York: Routledge.
Liu, H. Y., and Maas, M. M. (2021). ‘Solving for X?’ Towards a problem-finding
framework to ground long-term governance strategies for artificial intelligence.
Futures 21, 126. doi: 10.1016/j.futures.2020.102672
Liu, H. Y., Maas, M. M., Danaher, J., Scarcella, L., Lexer, M., and
Van Rompaey, L. (2020). Artificial intelligence and legal disruption:
a new model for analysis. Law Innov. Technol. 12, 205–258.
doi: 10.1080/17579961.2020.1815402
Makridakis, S. (2017). The forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI)
revolution: its impact on society and firms. Futures 90, 46–60.
doi: 10.1016/j.futures.2017.03.006
Marres, N. (2007). The issues deserve more credit: Pragmatist contributions to
the study of public involvement in controversy. Soc. Stud. Sci. 37, 759–780.
doi: 10.1177/0306312706077367
Mead, G. H. (2020). L’Hypothèse de travail dans la réforme sociale (1899).
Pragmata 3, 356–362. Available online at: https://revuepragmata.files.
wordpress.com/2021/04/pragmata-2020-3-8-mead.pdf (accessed February 1,
2022).
Misuraca, G., and Van Noordt, C. (2020). AI Watch - Artificial Intelligence
in public services, EUR 30255 EN. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the
European Union.
O’Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of Math Destruction, How Big Data Increases Inequality
and Threatens Democracy. New York, NY: Broadway Books,.
OPSI (2020). OPSI AI strategies, and public sector components. Obs. Public Sect.
Innov. 2020, 12. Available online at: https://oecd.ai/en/ (accessed May 5, 2022).
Ostrom, E. (2005). Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. Paper presented at the international conference on electronic
government, San Benedetto del Tronto, Italy.
Paltieli, G. (2021). The political imaginary of National AI Strategies. AI and Soc.
21, 258. doi: 10.1007/s00146-021-01258-1
Pasquale, F. (2015). The Black Box Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Radu, R. (2021). Steering the governance of artificial intelligence:
national strategies in perspective. Policy Soc. 40, 178–193.
doi: 10.1080/14494035.2021.1929728
Raji, I. D., Gebru, T., Mitchell, M., Buolamwini, J., Lee, J., and Emily, D. (2020).
“Saving face: investigating the ethical concerns of facial recognition auditing,”
in Proceedings of the 2020 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society
(New York, NY: AIES ’20).
Resnick, M., Berg, R., and Eisenberg, M. (2000). Beyond black
boxes: bringing transparency and aesthetics back to scientific
investigation. J. Learn. Sci. 9, 7–30. doi: 10.1207/s15327809jls
0901_3
Rochet, J. C., and Tirole, J. (2003). Platform competition in two-sided markets. J.
Euro. Econ. Assoc. 1, 990–1029. doi: 10.1162/154247603322493212

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

16

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

Gianni et al.

Governance of Responsible AI

January 2019. Available online at: https://thediplomat.com/2019/01/why-arechinese-courts-turning-to-ai/
Zhang, D., Mishra, S., Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, J., Ganguli, D., Grosz, B., et al.
(2021). “The AI Index 2021 annual report,” in AI Index Steering Committee,
Human-Centered AI Institute, (Stanford, CA: Stanford University). Available
online at: https://aiindex.stanford.edu/report/ (accessed February 1, 2022).
Zimmermann, B. (2020). Capabilités et développement de l’individualité. De
Dewey à Sen, la voie d’un pragmatisme critique. Pragmata, 3, p. 134-175.
https://revuepragmata.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/pragmata-2020-3-4zimmermann.pdf
Zittrain, J. L. (2006). The Generative Internet. Harvard Law Rev. 1974, 119.
doi: 10.1145/1435417.1435426
Zuiderwijk, A., Chen, Y. C., and Salem, F. (2021). Implications of the use
of artificial intelligence in public governance: a systematic literature review
and a research agenda. Gov. Inform. Q. 38, 577. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2021.10
1577

Veale, M. (2020). A Critical Take on the Policy Recommendations of the EU HighLevel Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. Europ. J. Risk Regulat. 11, 24.
doi: 10.1017/err.2019.65
Viscusi, G., Rusu, A., and Florin, M.-V. (2020). Public strategies for
artificial intelligence: which value drivers? Computer 53, 38–46,
doi: 10.1109/MC.2020.2995517
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., and Floridi, L. (2017). Why a right to explanation
of automated decision-making does not exist in the General Data
Protection Regulation. Int. Data Privacy Law 7, 76–99. doi: 10.1093/idpl/
ipx005
Wagner, B. (2018). “Ethics as an Escape from Regulation: From ethics-washing
to ethics-shopping?” in Being Profiled. Cogitas ergo sum, ed M. Hildebrandt
(Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press), p. 18.
Wallach, W., and Marchant, G. E. (2018). An agile ethical/legal model for the
international and national governance of AI and robotics. Assoc. Adv. Artific.
Intell. 18, 77. Available online at: https://www.aies-conference.com/2018/
contents/papers/main/AIES_2018_paper_77.pdf (accessed February 1, 2022).
Wilson, C. (2022). Public engagement and AI: a values analysis of
national strategies. Govern. Inform. Q. 39, 52. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2021.1
01652
Winfield, A. F., and Jirotka, M. (2018). Ethical governance is essential to
building trust in robotics and artificial intelligence systems. Philosophic.
Trans. Royal Soc. A Math. Physic. Eng. Sci. 376, 20180085. doi: 10.1098/rsta.
2018.0085
Wirtz, B. W., Weyerer, J. C., and Geyer, C. (2019). Artificial intelligence and the
public sector-applications and challenges. Int. J. Public Administr. 42, 596–615.
doi: 10.1080/01900692.2018.1498103
Wirtz, B. W., Weyerer, J. C., and Sturm, B. J. (2020). The dark sides of artificial
intelligence: an integrated AI governance framework for public administration.
Int. J. Public Administr. 43, 818–829. doi: 10.1080/01900692.2020.17
49851
Yeasmin, S. (2019). Benefits of Artificial Intelligence in Medicine,” in 2019 2nd
International Conference on Computer Applications and Information Security
(ICCAIS), pp. 1–6.
Yeung, K., Howes, A., and Pogrebna, G. (2019). “AI governance by human rightscentred design, deliberation and oversight: an end to ethics washing,” in The
Oxford Handbook of AI Ethics, eds Dubber, M., Pasquale, F. (New York, NY:
Oxford University Press).
Yu, M., and Du, G. (2019). Why are Chinese courts turning to AI?’ The Diplomat. 19

Frontiers in Computer Science | www.frontiersin.org

Author Disclaimer: Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the funding agencies.
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Gianni, Lehtinen and Nieminen. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.

17

May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 873437

