Governance, politics & policies of artificial intelligence
ethicsdialogues.eu/2021/05/11/governance-politics-policies-of-artificial-intelligence/
May 11, 2021

While recent debates about societal aspects of Artificial Intelligence (AI) have largely
focused on ethics principles and guidelines, questions of governance, politics and policies
of AI have received less scrutiny. To address this gap, over more than three years I have
been leading AI governance research programme to examine questions such as – What
are the roles of the government in shaping AI development and use? And what are the
roles of society? How and why AI strategies are developed and launched? And which
ideas, interests and values do they prioritise and which ones do they leave out?
These questions are addressed in our analysis of 49 AI policy documents adopted by
national governments, international organizations, consultancies, think tanks, and civil
society organizations. An interdisciplinary conceptual framework developed for this
research approaches AI as an emerging technology characterized by fast growth,
considerable impacts, uncertainty, hype, and positive as well as negative expectations.
This research on AI governance has contributed to the Human Brain Project (HBP) work
on societal and ethical aspects of AI and led to a number of outputs. Here I would like to
highlight two recent scientific articles resulting from this research.

Governance of AI: the roles of the government & publics

1/3

Our recent article ‘Framing governance for a contested emerging technology: insights
from AI policy’ (Ulnicane et al 2020) is part of a forthcoming special issue on governance
of AI and robotics in Policy & Society journal and examines how AI policy documents
frame governance as a way to resolve public controversies about benefits and concerns
related to AI. In the context of recent hype surrounding the development and use of AI,
many countries and organizations have launched their AI strategies. In this process, they
have learned from each other and also from international assemblies such as the World
Economic Forum and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. This
has led to some similarities across the documents. They depict the benefits of AI not only
as traditional contribution of new technologies to economic growth but also focus on the
potential of AI to help in tackling Grand Societal challenges and achieving the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
AI policy documents assign diverse roles to the government in shaping socially beneficial
development and use of AI. These include promoting AI, mitigating risks, and
encouraging involvement of stakeholders in AI development and use. Focusing on
diverse roles assigned to the government helps to move beyond traditional debates in
technology policy of big government vs. small government and to develop more nuanced
understanding of the roles of the public sector in shaping new technologies. Furthermore,
AI policy documents assign an important role to multi-stakeholder forums bringing
together diverse publics. While importance of involving civil society, users, marginal and
vulnerable groups have been discussed in AI policy documents, in practice it has been
challenging to ensure balanced representation and avoid capture of these forums by wellresourced and organised vested interests.

‘Good Governance’ beyond ethics guidelines & regulation
Another article, ‘Good governance as a response of discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons for
AI from other emerging technologies’ (Ulnicane et al 2021) is part of a recent special
issue ‘Artificial Intelligence & its Discontents’ published in Interdisciplinary Science
Reviews journal and further examines the hopes and fears associated with AI in policy
documents, how they compare to other emerging technologies, as well as proposed
solutions and their limitations. Typical solutions suggested for realizing benefits and
mitigating risks of AI are ethics guidelines and regulation. While both are often mentioned
together indicating that they are closely related, careful reading of the documents reveals
some interesting differences in attitudes towards ethics guidelines and regulation. While
there is a lot of enthusiasm about ethics guidelines, attitude towards regulation is more
cautious with caveats attached. In debates about AI, this difference in attitudes is
associated with the so-called ‘ethics washing’ when powerful actors focus on ethics
guidelines as a way to avoid or delay binding regulation.
Drawing on studies of other emerging technologies, this article highlights that there are
more opportunities for developing ‘good governance’ than ethics guidelines and
regulation. These include cooperation and coordination between the state and diverse
non-state actors, international research collaboration, and Responsible Innovation
approach.
2/3

Framing Artificial Intelligence Futures
In addition to scientific publications, this research has also contributed to educational,
outreach and other activities within and beyond the Human Brain Project. It provided input
into the recently launched HBP Ethics and Society team’s Opinion ‘Trust and
Transparency in Artificial Intelligence’. And the video lecture ‘Responsible Artificial
Intelligence: Ethics, governance, and policy’, part of the HBP online course ‘Research,
ethics and societal impact’ is an example of education and training activities stemming
from this work.
This research has also led to invited talks and contributions such as a recent guest
seminar ‘Framing Artificial Intelligence Futures’ and contribution to the webinar to launch
the 2020 Government AI Readiness Index report for Europe. Further outputs include
organization of conference panels, presentations at workshops and conferences, and
creation of international networks. More scientific publications and activities based on this
work are forthcoming, stay tuned!
By Inga Ulnicane

References:
Ulnicane, I., W. Knight, T. Leach, B. C. Stahl & W.-G. Wanjiku (2020) Framing governance
for a contested emerging technology: insights from AI policy, Policy and
Society, https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2020.1855800
Ulnicane, I., D. O. Eke, W. Knight, G. Ogoh & B. C. Stahl (2021) Good governance as a
response to discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons for AI from other emerging
technologies, Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 46:1-2, 71-93
https://doi.org/10.1080/03080188.2020.1840220

3/3

