The Global Politics of
Artificial Intelligence
Edited by

Maurizio Tinnirello
First published in 2022
ISBN: 978-0-429-44667-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-31457-3 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-44672-6 (ebk)

Chapter 2
Governance of Artificial Intelligence:
Emerging International Trends
and Policy Frames
Inga Ulnicane, William Knight, Tonii Leach,
Bernd Carsten Stahl, and Winter-Gladys Wanjiku
(CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)
DOI: 10.1201/9780429446726-2

CHAPTER

2

Governance of
Artificial Intelligence
Emerging International
Trends and Policy Frames
Inga Ulnicane, William Knight, Tonii Leach,
Bernd Carsten Stahl, and Winter-Gladys Wanjiku
CONTENTS
2.1 Introduction: Why Focus on AI Policy and Governance?
2.2 Emerging Sciences and Technologies and Their Governance:
Hype, Expectations, and Uncertainties
2.3 Literature Review of AI Governance: Ethics, Responsibility
and Policy
2.4 Fast-Developing Policy For AI: International Trends and Drivers
2.5 Emerging AI Policy Frames: Revolution, Global Race, and
Balancing Benefits, Risks, and Responsibilities
2.6 Conclusions: Key Insights and Future Research Questions
Acknowledgements
Notes

30
31
35
37
41
47
48
48

Only if we acknowledge technology’s power to shape our hearts
and minds, and our collective beliefs and behaviours, will the
discourses of governance shift from fatalistic determinism to the
emancipation of self-determination.1

DOI: 10.1201/9780429446726-2

29

30 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

2.1 INTRODUCTION: WHY FOCUS ON AI
POLICY AND GOVERNANCE?
Recent advances in machine learning and data analytics have led to high
public policy activity addressing artificial intelligence (AI) around the
world. Since 2016, national governments, international organisations, civil
society organisations, think tanks, and consultancies have launched their
AI strategies and reports. Countries and regions from the United States
and China to the European Union, France, the United Kingdom, and others have declared their ambitions to be leaders in AI. How to explain this
recent political and policy interest in AI?
While the development of AI goes back to the 1950s, major advances
in the availability of data and computing power have only recently taken
place.2 This has led to the increasing use of AI over a wide range of areas,
from political campaigns and labour markets to health, education, and the
military, to name just a few. New technological opportunities and related
scandals (e.g. the Cambridge Analytica case) have stirred debates among
policymakers, politicians, experts, and stakeholders about the positive
and negative effects of AI on politics, economics, labour markets, fairness,
privacy, and other key societal issues.3
Public policy and governance can play a major role in ensuring beneficial and avoiding harmful developments of AI. 4 While recently AI development has been primarily driven by large global private companies and
their profit motives, emerging policy developments suggest that national
governments and international organisations, in collaboration with a
broad range of stakeholders, are preparing governance frameworks for AI.
A wide range of policy and governance tools, including hard and soft legislation and regulation, investments, retraining programmes, awareness,
and other measures have been suggested to facilitate the development and
use of AI in a socially desirable manner towards ends such as accountability, fairness, and inclusion.
The fast-developing policies and politics of AI have, so far, been studied
mostly from an ethical and philosophical viewpoint but less so from the
perspective of policy and governance, which can play an important role in
shaping technology development and use according to societal interests
and values. To address this gap, this chapter aims to reflect on some of
the emerging international AI policy trends and ideas. It addresses the
two main research questions: What is driving fast-developing AI policies around the world? And what are the main frames of the emerging AI
policies? Thus, this chapter aims to contribute to AI research by providing

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 31

insights into policy dynamics and content. Using concepts and insights
from the social studies of emerging sciences and technologies, such as the
performative function of hypes and expectations, as well as collaboration and competition dynamics in emerging fields, helps to make sense of
emerging AI policies, politics, and governance to contextualise recent AI
policies and governance in a longer-term development of emerging technologies and to critically reflect on them.
This chapter proceeds as follows: Section 2.2 introduces a conceptual
framework to study emerging sciences and technologies and their governance; Section 2.3 reviews the recent literature on AI governance; Section
2.4 outlines emerging international AI policy trends; Section 2.5 presents
three AI policy frames; finally, Section 2.6 summarises the main insights.

2.2 EMERGING SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGIES
AND THEIR GOVERNANCE: HYPE,
EXPECTATIONS, AND UNCERTAINTIES
To make sense of the current discussions about AI governance and policy,
it is helpful to situate them in the context of social studies of science and
technology. These studies address a number of conceptual questions that
are highly relevant for reflecting on recent developments in AI policy and
governance, including questions such as—What is technology? What are
the characteristics of emerging sciences and technologies? What is governance? And what are the specific features of governance of emerging
technologies?
According to Eric Schatzberg, technology is an odd concept with multiple meanings.5 Traditional understandings of technology associating it
with hardware need to be revisited in the digital age. According to a popular policy definition that covers digital technologies but is rather business
oriented,
Technology refers to the state of knowledge on how to convert
resources into outputs. This includes the practical use and application to business processes or products of technical methods,
systems, devices, skills and practices.6
To make sense of the diverse understandings of technology, it is helpful to consider a distinction that Schatzberg makes between the cultural
and instrumental approach to technology, whereas the cultural approach
“view[s] technology as a creative expression of human culture,” while the

32 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

instrumental approach insists that technology “is a mere instrument that
serves ends defined by others.”7 He believes that a shift from an instrumental to cultural understanding would “help humans to exert more conscious control over their technological futures.”8
Co-creation of society and technology, the social embedding of technology and its political nature are some of the key themes addressed in the
social studies of science and technology. Sheila Jasanoff reminds us that
“technological choices, are, as well, intrinsically political: they order society, distribute benefits and burdens, and channel power,”9 while Langdon
Winner suggests that “we should try to imagine and seek to build technical regimes compatible with freedom, social justice, and other key political
ends.”10 The societal embedding of technologies is highlighted by concepts
such as “socio-technical systems,” which refer to
the fact that individual technical artefacts or innovations are not
operating in isolation. On the contrary, the functioning of technical artefacts and innovations is highly dependent on specific and
complex ensembles of elements in which they are embedded. It is
not the individual artefact or innovation as such that has an effect,
but it is interplay with and embedding in other technical and nontechnical elements in society and economy.11
Emerging technologies are characterised by a number of distinct features.
According to Daniele Rotolo and colleagues,12 the five key attributes of an
emerging technology are radical novelty, relatively fast growth, coherence,
prominent impact, and uncertainty and ambiguity. They define an emerging technology as:
a radically novel and relatively fast-growing technology characterised by a certain degree of coherence persisting over time and
with the potential to exert a considerable impact on the socioeconomic domain(s), which is observed in terms of the composition
of actors, institutions and patterns of interactions among those,
along with the associated knowledge production processes. Its
most prominent impact, however, lies in the future, and so in the
emergence phase is still somewhat uncertain and ambiguous.13
Additionally, researchers in the social studies of science and technology14 have suggested that newly emerging fields experience very active

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 33

collaborative dynamics. Robert Merton15 distinguishes the “hot fields” of
emerging sciences from the “cold fields,” where the former has a high rate
of significant discoveries with implications well beyond the borders of the
speciality. “Hot fields” are highly competitive, and they attract larger proportions of talented scientists interested in working on challenging problems. According to Merton, intertwined cognitive and social processes of
intense interaction and rivalry in a new scientific field lead to the rapid
growth of knowledge and scientific innovation.
Furthermore, emerging technologies are characterised by hypes and
expectations, which also have a performative function.16 The performative
approach is
not interested in hypes as more or less accurate forecasts, but as
collectively pursued explorations of the future that affect activities in the present. While the early and high-rising expectations
that characterise hype hardly ever materialise precisely as foreseen, they structure and shape the materialisations that eventually occur.17
Hypes are closely related to expectations, as “hypes are constituted by
expectations at different levels”18 and expectations shape emerging technologies. Expectations are not always positive, suggesting breakthroughs,
hopes, and advancements, as they can also be negative, mentioning potential problems that will have to be solved. According to Harro Van Lente
and colleagues,19 both positive as well as negative expectations
guide the activities of innovative actors by setting agendas; they
provide legitimacy and thus help to attract financing and enrol
actors; and they, while often spread through spoken and written
words, may materialise in experiments and prototypes.
Importantly for policy and governance, “when more and more actors
share similar expectations, the promises inherent to these expectations
are gradually translated into requirements, guidelines, and specifications
regarding the new technology.”20
Due to their specific characteristics, such as radical novelty and prominent impact, governance is of particular importance for emerging technologies. Similar to the concept of technology discussed above, the concept
of governance has multiple meanings. According to Vasudha Chhotray

34 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

and Gerry Stoker, “governance is about the rules of collective decisionmaking in settings where there is a plurality of actors or organisations
and where no formal control systems can dictate the terms of the relationship between these actors and organisations.”21 In this definition, governance includes formal as well as informal rules (formal arrangements
and informal practices, conventions, and customs); decisions made by a
collective of individuals involving issues of mutual influence and control;
and a broad understanding of decision-making which can be strategic but
can also be contained in the everyday implementation practice of a system or organisation. Moreover, according to Chhotray and Stoker, “[t]he
characteristic forms of social interaction in governance rely on negotiation, signals, communication and hegemonic influence rather than direct
oversight and supervision.”22 Additionally, according to them, governance
“is about coordination and decision-making in the context of a plurality
of views and interests. Conflict and dissent provide essential ingredients
to a governance process.”23 For them, “governance is practice”24 and “the
purposes of governance then demand to be understood analytically and
empirically as a set of practices rather than through the lens of a ‘wish-list’
of principles to be followed.”25
In relation to socio-technical systems, Susana Borras and Jakob Edler26
define governance “as the mechanisms whereby societal actors and state
actors interact and coordinate to regulate issues of societal concern.” This
understanding of governance highlights that the state increasingly coordinates its activities with a wide range of actors, including from the private sector, civil society, and expert communities. Changing ideas about
the role of the state in the governance of technologies is also captured in
concepts such as “the entrepreneurial state”27 that emphasises the importance of public sector investing and taking risks to co-shape technological
development towards societal goals known in recent policy discussions as
Grand Challenges 28 or missions in areas of the United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals, such as environment and climate change.29
Governance of emerging sciences and technologies faces special challenges due to uncertainties around their future developments, societal
benefits, and risks.30 To address the specific needs of emerging sciences
and technologies, Stefan Kuhlmann and colleagues31 suggested the concept of “tentative governance” “when public and private interventions are
designed as a dynamic process that is prudent and preliminary rather than
assertive and persistent. Tentative governance typically aims at creating
spaces for probing and learning instead of stipulating definitive targets.”32

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 35

As opposed to more definitive modes of governance, tentative governance
maintains flexibility and is open to experimentation, learning, and reflexivity. While uncertainty is a typical characteristic for all sciences and technologies, and thus their governance can benefit from including elements
of tentativeness, uncertainties are particularly pronounced in the case of
emerging sciences and technologies, and therefore tentative governance
is of special importance here. Kuhlmann and colleagues emphasise that
the added value generated by the tentative governance concept
resides, first and foremost, in making clear that in the context of
innovation studies governance needs to be appropriately conceptualised in order to avoid unrealistic assumptions about the steering of innovation in a desired way or direction.33
According to them, elements of tentativeness can be found in a number
of existing social science approaches such as reflexive governance, anticipatory governance, experimentalist governance, constructive technology
assessment, and responsible research and innovation (for more on responsible research and innovation, see Section 2.3).
Insights from the literature on emerging technologies and their governance are highly relevant for understanding recent and ongoing developments in the field of AI. Based on these insights, it can be expected that
AI will be characterised by dynamic collaboration and competition, the
influence of uncertainty, performative function of hype and positive as
well as negative expectations. This chapter will examine these features in
the context of policy and governance.

2.3 LITERATURE REVIEW OF AI GOVERNANCE:
ETHICS, RESPONSIBILITY AND POLICY
In AI debates and research, the term “governance” is used in multiple
ways. In AI policy documents, “governance” is mentioned in the context
of government, regulation, and ethics without hardly ever defining the
term.34 Similarly, in research on AI, the term “governance” often remains
unspecified and is used in many different ways. It is used in the literature
on ethical and legal aspects of AI,35 which is part of AI ethics research.36
It is also used to examine the use of AI in the public sector and emerging international cooperation. Moreover, it is closely related to discussions
about AI policy. This section provides some illustrative examples of the
ways that the term “governance” is used in the social studies of AI.

36 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

Research on the ethical aspects of AI governance focuses on issues such
as fairness, transparency, privacy, and accountability, as well as responses
to large-scale discrimination and disappearance of jobs due to AI-based
automation.37 To address these issues, researchers have suggested a number of frameworks and roadmaps for the ethical governance of AI. Alan
Winfield and Marina Jirotka define ethical governance as
a set of processes, procedures, cultures and values designed to ensure
the highest standards of behaviour. Ethical governance thus goes
beyond simply good (i.e. effective) governance, in that it inculcates
ethical behaviours in both individual designers and the organisations in which they work. Normative ethical governance is seen as an
important pillar of responsible research and innovation.38
Thus, studies of (ethical) AI governance draw on established approaches
such as responsible research and innovation, which in recent years has
been widely used in science and technology studies, practice and policy.39
According to one influential definition, “responsible innovation means
taking care of the future through collective stewardship of science and
innovation in the present”40 and is based on four dimensions of anticipation, reflexivity, inclusion, and responsiveness. Virginia Dignum, who
applies the RRI approach to AI, defines Responsible AI as “the development of intelligent systems according to fundamental human principles
and values.”41 According to her, “responsibility is about ensuring that
results are beneficial for many instead of a source of revenue for a few.”42
Winfield and Jirotka43 suggest a roadmap for ethical governance of
robotics and AI, which they see as essential for building public trust. Their
roadmap includes ethics, standards, regulation, RRI, and public engagement. By bringing these elements together, they aim to address what they
see as a gap between principles and practice. To facilitate translating ethical
principles into the practice of effective and transparent ethical governance,
Winfield and Jirotka44 propose the following five pillars: first, publish an
ethical code of conduct; second, provide ethics and responsible innovation
training; third, practice responsible innovation, including the engagement
of wider stakeholders within a framework of anticipatory governance that
includes an ethical risk assessment of new products; fourth, be transparent about ethical governance; and fifth, really value ethical governance as
one of the core values rather than just a smokescreen.
Another research stream uses the term “governance” to examine the
impact of AI on decision-making in public administration.45 The concept

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 37

of governance is also used to analyse emerging international AI initiatives and to develop proposals for their future development,46 as well as
to discuss prospects for global cooperation.47 Some studies have analysed
governance and policy aspects of specific AI applications such as autonomous vehicles.48
Governance issues are addressed in the literature on AI policy. A number of studies have examined national AI strategies and other policy documents. Some have analysed initial AI policy documents starting from
2016 (see Section 2.4 below) from ethical49 and expertise50 perspectives.
National strategies of the Nordic countries—Sweden, Finland, Norway
and Denmark—as digital frontrunners have been analysed and compared
according to the cultural values of trust, transparency, and openness51 as
well as ethical principles52 and influence of the EU AI policy.53 Studies
of AI policy documents have examined framing of socio-technical future
visions in German AI policy documents and media,54 national varieties of
AI discourses in British, German, and Dutch policies,55 and the shaping
of China’s AI policy initiatives.56 The framing of governance, 57 as well as
concerns and proposed solutions,58 in AI policy documents have also been
studied.
Several publications provide recommendations for AI policy, outlining key challenges,59 setting out actionable principles to implement ethics
guidelines,60 and trying to bridge the gap between near-term and longterm AI concerns.61 A number of publications on AI highlight the need for
policies and regulations that would mitigate risks and direct AI development and use towards public benefit.62
To summarise, this section demonstrates that the concept of governance has been used in AI research in multiple ways, referring to ethical
and legal aspects, responsible innovation, use of AI in the public sector, international AI initiatives, and policy documents. While so far the
social studies of AI have had a strong focus on ethics (even when using
the terms of policy and governance), this chapter will proceed to examine
political, policy, and governance issues, which have so far received less
attention.

2.4 FAST-DEVELOPING POLICY FOR AI:
INTERNATIONAL TRENDS AND DRIVERS
Since 2016, national governments, international organisations, think
tanks, civil societies, and consultancies around the world have regularly
launched new AI policy documents.63 While almost all of these documents

38 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

mention AI in the title, there is no agreed definition of AI. 64 Policy documents typically use AI as an umbrella term that includes machine learning, algorithms, autonomous systems, and other related terms. According
to the definition used in the European Commission’s 2018 communication on AI in Europe, AI
refers to systems that display intelligent behaviour by analysing their environment and taking actions—with some degree of
autonomy—to achieve specific goals. AI-based systems can be
purely software-based, acting in the virtual world (e.g. voice assistants, image analysis software, search engines, speech and face
recognition systems), or AI can be embedded in hardware devices
(e.g. advanced robots, autonomous cars, drones or Internet of
Things applications).65
Early AI policy documents were published by the US Executive Office of
the President, UK House of Commons and European Parliament. These
documents analyse ethical, social, and economic topics but have been criticised for coming “short of providing an overarching political vision and
long-term strategy for the development of a ‘good AI society,’”66 and for
occasionally relying on the opinions of public figures such as Elon Musk
and Stephen Hawking, rather than on AI experts.67 In subsequent years,
the launch of these documents has been followed by intensified AI policymaking around the world.
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), in early 2020 “around the world, at least 50 countries (including the European Union) have developed, or are in the process of developing, a national AI strategy.”68 These data also demonstrate
that the development of AI strategies is unevenly distributed around the
world. Most of the existing strategies have been launched in Europe, North
America, and major Asian powerhouses such as China, India, Japan, and
South Korea, with very little activity in Africa, Latin America, and large
parts of Asia. These uneven developments around the world present limitations and potential challenges with AI policy and governance developments being concentrated in the most developed parts of the world.
Similar uneven international developments can be observed in a related
field of AI ethics. A recent review of AI ethics guidelines analysed 84 documents; most of them were released in the US (21), within the EU (19), followed by the UK (13) and Japan (4).69 Several studies indicate considerable

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 39

convergence among the documents.70 In their review of six ethical AI
frameworks,71 Luciano Floridi and colleagues72 synthesise 47 principles
found in these frameworks into five principles: beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, and explicability. While the first four of these
principles have been used in bioethics, the fifth—explicability—is added
specifically for AI. Other studies suggest that in addition to similarities
among these frameworks, there are also important differences. The abovementioned analysis of 84 ethics guidelines by Anna Jobin and colleagues73
reveals
a global convergence emerging around five ethical principles
(transparency, justice and fairness, non-maleficence, responsibility and privacy), with substantive divergence in relation to how
these principles are interpreted, why they are deemed important,
what issue, domain or actors they pertain to and how they should
be implemented.74
The examination of 112 documents by Daniel Schiff and colleagues found
meaningful differences across documents prepared by public, private, and
non-governmental organisations, highlighting that “as compared to documents from private entities, NGO, and public sector documents reflect
more ethical breadth in the number of topics covered, are more engaged
with law and regulation, and are generated through a process that are
more participatory.”75
The important question is—what is driving this intensive policy development in AI in the most developed parts of the world? While major
policy initiatives have also been launched in cases of other emerging
technologies, such as nanotechnology and life sciences, the political and
policy attention devoted to AI around the world since late 2016 is unprecedented. AI has some important differences from previous technologies.
If nanotechnology and life sciences raised questions about their effects
on human health and economy, then AI applications and effects go far
beyond that and include major impacts on the political system, labour
market, and welfare state. The idea that machine intelligence can supersede human intelligence has captured the collective imagination in cases
such as the AlphaGo computer programme beating the Go world champion.76 Additionally, scandals such as the misuse of social media data for
influencing democratic processes by the company Cambridge Analytica
have added urgency to the calls for public authorities to regulate the use

40 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

of AI, machine learning and big data analytics. Thus, the intense political
and policy attention paid to AI is largely a result of the broad and diverse
effects of AI on numerous areas of human activity.
Another driving force behind the recent development of AI policies
has been international organisations such as the World Economic Forum
(WEF) and the OECD that have put AI on the agenda of political leaders.
In the context of WEF, focus on AI has been part of discussions about
the so-called Fourth Industrial Revolution. The concept of the Fourth
Industrial Revolution has been promoted by the founder and executive
chairman of the WEF, Klaus Schwab, who claims that since 2000 the world
has been experiencing the Fourth Industrial Revolution, which is characterised by a fusion of new technologies across physical, digital, and biological domains.77 According to Schwab, the Fourth Industrial Revolution
follows the first one, that from 1760 to 1840 took place due to railroads,
steam engines, and mechanical production; the second industrial revolution was from the late 19th century to early 20th century characterised
by mass production, electricity, and assembly lines; and finally, the third
industrial revolution that from the 1960s onwards took place with the
development of computer/digital revolution, semiconductors, personal
computing, and the internet. AI is one of the technologies that plays a key
role in the discussions about the Fourth Industrial Revolution and associated governance and policy.
Furthermore, the OECD, which has long played a key role in developing ideas for science, technology, and innovation policy,78 has become a
major international forum for expertise and dialogue on AI policy. The
OECD AI principles include recommendations for policymakers to invest
in AI research and development, foster a digital ecosystem for AI, shape
an enabling policy environment for AI, build human capacity, and prepare for labour market transformation, as well as cooperate internationally for trustworthy AI.79 The OECD AI Policy Observatory is a platform
that provides information, data, and multi-disciplinary analysis of AI.80
The OECD Network of Experts on AI (ONE AI) is a multi-disciplinary
and multi-stakeholder community that contributes policy, technical, and
business expert input to inform OECD analysis and recommendations.81
There have also been other international fora emerging to discuss
AI policy, for example, since 2017 the United Nations’ International
Telecommunication Union has been organising annual AI for Good summits to facilitate global and inclusive dialogue on AI. Moreover, there is
a lot of policy learning 82 taking place across countries and organisations.

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 41

For example, when the European Commission was preparing its AI policy
documents, it reviewed AI strategies from major economic powers: the US,
China, Japan, Germany, United Arab Emirates, and the UK.83 Similarly,
recommendations for US national strategy are accompanied by a map of
AI national strategies around the world.84 Furthermore, the European
Commission’s 2018 document on the European perspective on AI undertakes a detailed analysis of the global AI landscape and the EU’s vision
and performance in a comparative context.85 An interesting development
in comparing AI policies and performance across countries and regions
is the emergence of a number of global AI rankings such as the Global AI
Index,86 Government AI Readiness Index,87 and AI Index.88 These rankings compare national AI strategies, investments, publications and a range
of other indicators.
Thus, a broad range of AI applications in interaction with global political debates and international policy learning facilitate and reinforce fastdeveloping AI policies. AI policy developments, however, are unevenly
distributed around the world. In the case of fast-developing AI policy in
the most developed parts of the world, we can observe the performative
function that hype and expectations play89 (see Section 2.2 above) in shaping not only emerging technology, but also policy. Perceptions of hype and
high expectations towards AI help to mobilise policymakers and stakeholders, create a sense of urgency, and guide activities and decisions in
policymaking, as will be further demonstrated in the next section.

2.5 EMERGING AI POLICY FRAMES: REVOLUTION,
GLOBAL RACE, AND BALANCING BENEFITS,
RISKS, AND RESPONSIBILITIES
What are the key ideas, aims, and objectives of AI policy documents that
have been launched in recent years? To study the content and ideas of AI
policy documents, this chapter draws on the approach of policy framing.90
Policy framing is a productive way to get insights into policy ideas and
understanding because in frames, “facts, values, theories, and interests are
integrated.”91 According to Martin Rein and Donal Schön,
framing is a way of selecting, organising, interpreting, and making sense of a complex reality to provide guideposts for knowing,
analysing, persuading, and acting. A frame is a perspective from
which an amorphous, ill-defined, problematic situation can be
made sense of and acted on.92

42 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

The policy frames here are derived from reviewing policy documents 93
and political debates on AI. Three key frames can be distinguished: first,
AI as a revolutionary, transformative, and disruptive technology; second,
closely interconnected global competition and collaboration in the field
of AI; and third, a three-pillar approach of facilitating benefits, managing
risks, and ensuring responsibilities are met.
The first policy frame that presents AI as a revolutionary, transformative, and disruptive technology highlights promising as well as troublesome aspects of AI. An example of this frame can be seen in the US
national AI research and development strategic plan that introduces AI as
“a transformative technology that holds promise for tremendous societal
and economic benefit. AI has the potential to revolutionise how we live,
work, learn, discover, and communicate.”94 Similarly, the EU communication on AI frames AI as “one of the most strategic industries of the 21st
century” and states that “like the steam engine or electricity in the past, AI
is transforming our world, our society and our industry.”95 As can be seen
in this quote, AI is often compared to previous transformative and disruptive technologies as well as industrial and digital revolutions, highlighting
similarities as well as differences.
Some policy documents highlight the unique character of AI, describing it as “the most transformative force in the twenty-first century. Its scale,
speed, and complexity are unprecedented, disrupting every industry and
sector across the globe.”96 On the other hand, documents often emphasise
similarities between AI and other technologies and revolutions in terms
of presenting opportunities, challenges, and changes. Among the opportunities presented by AI, policy discourse mentions its potential to contribute to achieving the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals
and tackling grand societal challenges “from treating chronic diseases to
reducing fatality rates in traffic accidents to fighting climate change or
anticipating cybersecurity.”97 At the same time, it is indicated that, as
with other revolutions, transformations, and disruptions, AI will change
employment and labour markets as well as other fields. Similar to previous
transformative and disruptive technologies, AI is expected to bring risks
and challenges. This can be seen in the European Commission’s statement
that “as with any transformative technology, some AI applications may
raise new ethical and legal questions, for example, related to liability or
potentially biased decision-making.”98
Comparisons of AI with industrial and digital revolutions can also be
seen in the media and academic literature.99 The discourse of technological

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 43

revolution is not new. Langdon Winner has pointed out that proclamations of computer and other “revolutions” have been present since the
1960s.100 In conclusion to his critical examination of the use of the term
“revolution” to talk about information technologies, Winner points out
that “calling such changes ‘revolutionary,’ we tacitly acknowledge that
these are matters that require reflection, possibly even strong public action
to ensure that the outcomes are desirable.”101
To summarise, the first policy frame highlights that AI is associated
with major and far-reaching changes and is often seen as an important
element of the Fourth Industrial Revolution discussed in the previous section. National governments and international organisations emphasise
very positive expectations towards AI but also mention some problematic
aspects. As discussed in Section 2.2, positive expectations, which can be
expressed in superlatives, constitute hypes in emerging fields that (irrespective of how accurate they are) affect and guide activities in the present, including agenda-setting and financing. This can be seen in policy
documents where statements about revolutionary changes brought by AI
are immediately followed with mentions of actions taken by governments:
AI promises to revolutionise the way all of us go about our daily
lives, impacting important sectors, including transport, health,
education, defence, and finance. Governments across the world
are working to understand the consequences of AI in order to create policy frameworks and regulations that harness its economic
and social opportunities while also mitigating its potential risks.102
Moreover, the perceived transnational reach of the AI revolution leads to
calls for global action and cooperation, as can be seen in this quote:
AI, the driver of this technological revolution, transcends conventional geographical boundaries and, hence, if we wish to address
the heart of the issue, the solutions must be at an international
scale.103
Thus, strong positive expectations and hype surrounding emerging technology create a sense of urgency for global competition and collaboration,
which can be seen in the following second AI policy frame.
The second policy frame focuses on emerging global competition
and collaboration in the field of AI. Many countries and organisations

44 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

have declared their ambitions to be leaders in AI. The 2016 US document
“Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence” declared that “the
United States, a leader in AI R&D, can continue to play a key role in global
research coordination.”104 In summer 2017, China’s State Council called for
China to become “the world’s primary AI innovation center” by 2030.105 In
September 2017, the Russian President announced that the future belongs
to AI and “whoever leads in AI will rule the world.”106 In early 2018, speaking at the WEF in Davos, the then UK prime minister announced that “we
are establishing the UK as a world leader in Artificial Intelligence.”107 In
March 2018, while presenting a national AI strategy, the French President
announced the plan to turn his country into a world leader for AI research
and innovation.108 In April 2018, the communication on AI for Europe
stated the EU aim “to become a leader in AI revolution, in its own way and
based on its values.”109 The December 2018 document on the European
perspective on AI depicts the EU’s global position as follows:
There is strong global competition on AI among the USA, China
and Europe. The USA leads for now, but China is catching up fast
and aims to lead by 2030. For the EU, it is not so much a question
of winning or losing the race but of finding a way of embracing
the opportunities offered by AI in a way that is human-centred,
ethical, secure, and true to our core values.110
Discourses around the global leadership in AI have led to comparing
AI development to a new space race.111 Such international competitiveness discourses can help to mobilise political support and resources, but
they have also been criticised, for example, in Paul Krugman’s 1994 essay
“Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession” because according to him
they lead to bad policies, drawing resources and attention to the “attractive” competitiveness discourse rather than major economic and social
problems.112 An example here would be a well-known “the moon and the
ghetto” problem,113 when some popular areas and hyped technologies such
as a space race get much more political attention and resources than more
complex social problems of the ghetto. This problem has been pointed out
by Jack Stilgoe, who reminds us that “if we overinvest our hopes in new
technologies, we underinvest in other necessary but less glamorous areas,
including education, public health, infrastructure and maintenance.”114
Moreover, discourse on international competitiveness in AI depicts
technological development as a zero-sum game when one country wins

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 45

and others lose. Public policy and governance, however, can ensure that
global AI development is a positive-sum game increasing benefits for all.
Furthermore, the framing of relations between countries in the field of AI
development is characterised not only by competition but also by cooperation. An example here are the European countries that in April 2018 signed
a declaration to cooperate on AI.115 Emerging international cooperation
initiatives in AI116 include the Global Partnership on AI (GPAI) launched
in 2020. The GPAI, whose Secretariat is hosted at the OECD, currently
brings together 18 countries and the EU “to support and guide the responsible adoption of AI that is grounded in human rights, inclusion, diversity, innovation, economic growth, and societal benefit, while seeking to
address the UN Sustainable Development Goals.”117 Proposals for international cooperation in the field of AI include suggestions to use technology
diplomacy “to help all interested parties develop a shared understanding
and coordinate efforts to utilise AI for the benefit of humanity.”118
Furthermore, competition and cooperation are closely related.
Suggestions for the US leadership include calls for building strategic
partnerships around the world.119 Similarly, at the time when the French
President announced his plan to turn France into a world leader for AI, he
also proposed to set up a group akin to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change for AI.120 Thus, interactions among countries in AI development can be framed as “a competitive cooperation,” a notion coined
by Merton121 to describe relationships in the scientific community where
scientists at the same time compete for priority of discovery as well as
cooperate to exchange ideas and knowledge. While social studies of science have focused on the intense interaction and competition in emerging
fields in science and technology (see Section 2.2 above), here we can see
that these dynamics apply not only to the science and technology community, but to the realm of public policy as well. Heightened focus on
cooperation and competition among countries in AI development raises
traditional questions about who is included and who is excluded, and how
the benefits are distributed.
The third emerging frame focuses on the role of policy in balancing
benefits, risks, and responsibilities in the development and use of AI as a
revolutionary, transformative, and disruptive technology, as indicated in
the first frame discussed above. This third AI policy frame typically consists of the three pillars where the first is about realising opportunities, the
second deals with mitigating risks and negative outcomes, and the third
is about ensuring the responsible and ethical development of AI. While

46 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

some countries and organisations might prioritise one of these three pillars, elements of them can be found in many documents. For example, the
focus of the US 2016 Strategic Plan includes long-term investments in AI
research, security and safety of AI, standards and benchmarks, as well as
ethical, legal, and societal implications of AI.122
The three pillars are present in the EU 2018 communication on AI for
Europe. In this document, the first pillar is called “boosting the EU’s technological and industrial capacity and AI uptake across economy.”123 It
includes actions on stepping up investments, strengthening research and
innovation from the lab to the market, supporting AI research excellence
centres across Europe, bringing AI to all small businesses and potential
users, supporting testing and experimentation, attracting private investments, and making more data available. Here we can see some elements
of the previously discussed tentative governance approach to emerging
technologies (discussed in Section 2.2 above) when due to uncertainties,
governance is open to experimentation. The second pillar focuses on preparing for socioeconomic changes such as job replacement by providing
retraining. The third pillar, “ensuring an appropriate ethical and legal
framework”124 includes the preparation of AI ethics guidelines, action to
ensure safety and liability, as well as empowering individuals to make the
most of AI. While ethics guidelines and regulations are often mentioned
next to each other, giving the impression that both are closely related,
closer reading and examination reveals more enthusiasm about and progress in launching ethics guidelines, while issues of regulation are met with
more caution or even resistance.125
This third policy frame aims to present a balanced approach to new technologies where not only positive but also negative expectations towards
emerging technology are considered, and mechanisms are suggested to
address them. For example, it is not only about investing more in AI as a
promising technology but also planning retraining programmes to deal
with job losses due to automation. Moreover, focus on ethical, legal, and
societal implications and the need for standards, legislation, and ethical
frameworks represent an intention to mitigate risks and solve problems.
An important question for future research is how this suggested balanced
approach is implemented in practice.
Thus, the three emerging AI policy frames demonstrate the performative function of hypes and expectations in the case of an emerging technology. Irrespective of their accuracy, positive and negative expectations
towards AI influence emerging policies, political agendas, and resource

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 47

allocation. Furthermore, policies are affected by actual and perceived
competition and collaboration that can have both positive (e.g. mobilisation of resources) as well as problematic (e.g. driving resources from social
policies to hyped technologies) consequences.

2.6 CONCLUSIONS: KEY INSIGHTS AND
FUTURE RESEARCH QUESTIONS
This chapter provides an overview of emerging trends and frames of AI
policy, which since 2016 has been quickly developing around the world.
While the beginning of AI development can be traced back at least to
the 1950s, only recently has this technology attracted significant policy
attention due to major technological advances that have enabled a wide
range of applications. Thus, AI today has many characteristics of an
emerging technology along with associated uncertainties, collaboration
and competition dynamics, and performative function of hype as well
as the positive and negative expectations that influence policymaking
in this area.
Fast-developing AI policy, along with many strategies and other policy documents launched in recent years, is unprecedented in technology
policy. This can be explained by a wide range of AI applications that go
beyond typical emerging technology issues about impact on safety and
economic growth, and also affect the political system, labour market, and
welfare state. Scandals such as the Cambridge Analytica case have added
urgency to policy action in this area. Moreover, questions about machines
achieving or superseding human intelligence have a special resonance
within collective and individual imaginations. Furthermore, international assemblies such as the World Economic Forum and the OECD have
drawn additional attention to policies for AI and facilitated cross-national
learning in this area. AI policy developments, however, are unevenly distributed around the world and are concentrated in the most developed
regions.
This chapter identifies three main AI policy frames. These include
first, framing AI as a revolutionary, transformative and disruptive
technology; second, closely interconnected global competition and
collaboration in the field of AI; and third, a three-pillar approach of
realising opportunities, mitigating risks and ensuring responsibilities
are met. As suggested by the social studies of emerging technologies,
which highlight the performative function of hypes and expectations,
these emerging policy frames can have positive as well as problematic

48 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence

effects on resource allocation and political prioritisation. Thus, AI
policy analysis can benefit from critical engagement, which questions
resource re-allocation based on hypes, competitiveness discourse, and
representation of international AI development as a global race where
one country wins, and others lose. Moreover, while at the moment AI
policies are mostly developed and implemented at the national and EU
level, the need for international collaboration is recognised, and international cooperation initiatives are emerging.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This chapter has benefited from feedback on presentations of earlier drafts
at a number of international conferences, including the 2018 Regulating
Robotics and AI conference at the European University Institute in
Florence (Italy), the EASST 2018 conference in Lancaster (UK), the
2019 Singapore Public Policy Network meeting, the 2019 ISA Annual
Convention in Toronto (Canada), and the UACES 2019 conference in
Lisbon (Portugal). This work was supported by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation under
the Specific Grant Agreements No. 720270 (HBP SGA1), No. 785907 (HBP
SGA2) and No. 945539 (HBP SGA3).

NOTES
1. Jasanoff, Sheila. The ethics of invention: Technology and the human future.
New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2016, 267.
2. See e.g. Coeckelbergh, Mark. AI ethics. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2020;
Dignum, Virginia. Responsible artificial intelligence. How to develop and
use AI in a responsible way. Cham: Springer, 2019; Marcus, Gary, and Ernest
Davis. Rebooting AI: Building artificial intelligence we can trust. New York:
Pantheon Books, 2019.
3. See e.g. Bartoletti, Ivana. An artificial revolution: On power, politics and
AI. Southampton: Indigo Press, 2020; Noble, Safiya Umoja. Algorithms of
oppression: How search engines reinforce racism. New York: NYU Press,
2018; O’Neil, Cathy. Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases
inequality and threatens democracy. London: Penguin Books, 2016; Zuboff,
Shoshana. The age of surveillance capitalism: The fight for a human future at
the new frontier of power. London: Profile Books, 2019.
4. Ulnicane, Inga, Knight, William, Leach, Tonii, Stahl, Bernd Carsten and
Winter-Gladys Wanjiku. “Framing governance for a contested emerging
technology: Insights from AI policy.” Policy and Society 40, no.2 (2021):
158–177. https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2020.1855800; Ulnicane, Inga,
Eke, Damian Okaibedi, Knight, William, Ogoh, George and Bernd Carsten

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 49
Stahl. “Good governance as a response to discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons
for AI from other emerging technologies.” Interdisciplinary Science Reviews
46, no. 1–2 (2021): 71–93. https://doi.org/10.1080/03080188.2020.1840220;
Ulnicane, Inga “Artificial Intelligence in the European Union: Policy, ethics, and regulation.” In Routledge Handbook of European Integrations,
edited by Thomas Hoerber, Ignazio Cabras, and Gabriel Weber, 254-269.
Abingdon: Routledge, 2022.
5. Schatzberg, Eric. Technology: Critical history of a concept. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, 2018.
6. OECD/Eurostat. Oslo manual 2018: Guidelines for collecting, reporting and using
data on innovation. 4th edition. The Measurement of Scientific, Technological
and Innovation Activities. Paris: OECD Publishing/Luxembourg: Eurostat,
2018, 254. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264304604-en
7. Schatzberg. Technology: Critical history of a concept, 5.
8. Schatzberg. Technology: Critical history of a concept, 15.
9. Jasanoff. The ethics of invention: Technology and the human future, 243.
10. Winner, Langdon. The whale and the reactor. A search for limits in an age of
high technology. Second edition. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
2020, 55.
11. Borras, Susana, and Jakob Edler, eds. The governance of socio-technical systems: Explaining change. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2014, 1.
12. Rotolo, Daniele, Hicks, Diana and Ben R. Martin. “What is an emerging
technology?” Research Policy 44, no. 10 (2015): 1827–1843. https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.respol.2015.06.006
13. Rotolo, Hicks and Martin. “What is an emerging technology?,” 1828.
14. E.g. Crane, Diana. Invisible colleges. Diffusion of knowledge in scientific
communities. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1972; Mulkay,
Mike J. The social process of innovation. A study in the sociology of science.
London: Macmillan, 1972.
15. Merton, Robert. “Behaviour patterns of scientists.” In The sociology of science.
Theoretical and empirical investigations, edited by Robert Merton and Norman
Storer, 325–342. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973 [1968]: 331.
16. E.g. Van Lente, Harro, Spitters, Charlotte and Alexander Peine. “Comparing
technological hype cycles: Towards a theory.” Technological Forecasting and
Social Change 80, no. 8 (2013): 1615–1628. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore
.2012.12.004
17. Van Lente, Spitters and Peine. “Comparing technological hype cycles:
Towards a theory,” 1616.
18. Van Lente, Spitters and Peine. “Comparing technological hype cycles:
Towards a theory,” 1616.
19. Van Lente, Spitters and Peine. “Comparing technological hype cycles:
Towards a theory,” 1616.
20. Van Lente, Spitters and Peine. “Comparing technological hype cycles:
Towards a theory,” 1616.
21. Chhotray, Vasudha and Gerry Stoker. Governance theory and practice. A
cross-disciplinary approach. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009, 3.

50 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence
22. Chhotray and Stoker. Governance theory and practice. A cross-disciplinary
approach, 4.
23. Chhotray and Stoker. Governance theory and practice. A cross-disciplinary
approach, 6.
24. Chhotray and Stoker. Governance theory and practice. A cross-disciplinary
approach, 6.
25. Chhotray and Stoker. Governance theory and practice. A cross-disciplinary
approach, 5.
26. Borras and Edler. The governance of socio-technical systems: Explaining
change, 13–14.
27. Mazzucato, Mariana. The entrepreneurial state. Debunking public vs. private sector myths. London: Anthem Press, 2013.
28. See e.g. Ulnicane, Inga. “‘Grand challenges’ concept: A return of the ‘big
ideas’ in science, technology and innovation policy?” International Journal
of Foresight and Innovation Policy 11, no. 1–3 (2016): 5–21. https://doi.org/10
.1504/IJFIP.2016.078378
29. Mazzucato, Mariana. Mission economy: A moonshot guide to changing capitalism. London: Allen Lane, 2021.
30. Kuhlmann, Stefan, Stegmaier, Peter and Kornelia Konrad. “The tentative
governance of emerging science and technology—A conceptual introduction.” Research Policy 48, no. 5 (2019): 1091–1097. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.respol.2019.01.006
31. Kuhlmann, Stegmaier and Konrad. “The tentative governance of emerging
science and technology—A conceptual introduction.”
32. Kuhlmann, Stegmaier and Konrad. “The tentative governance of emerging
science and technology—A conceptual introduction,” 1091.
33. Kuhlmann, Stegmaier and Konrad. “The tentative governance of emerging
science and technology—A conceptual introduction,” 1096.
34. Ulnicane, Eke, Knight, Ogoh and Stahl. “Good governance as a response to
discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons for AI from other emerging technologies,” 34.
35. E.g. Cath, Corinne. “Governing artificial intelligence: Ethical, legal and
technical opportunities and challenges.” Philosophical Transactions A 376
(2018): 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2018.0080; Winfield, Alan F.T. and
Marina Jirotka. “Ethical governance is essential to building trust in robotics and artificial intelligence systems.” Philosophical Transactions A 376
(2018): 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2018.0085
36. E.g. Cath, Corinne, Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, Mariarosaria
Taddeo and Luciano Floridi. “Artificial intelligence and the ‘Good Society’:
The US, EU, and UK approach.” Science and Engineering Ethics 24 (2018):
505–528. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-017-9901-7; Jobin, Anna, Ienca,
Marcello and Effy Vayena. “The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines.”
Nature Machine Intelligence 1 (2019): 389–399. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s42256-019-0088-2; Floridi, Luciano, Cowls, Josh, Beltrametti, Monica et
al. “AI4People – An ethical framework for a good AI society: Opportunities,
risks, principles, and recommendations.” Minds & Machines 28 (2018):
689–707. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5.

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 51
37. Cath. “Governing artificial intelligence: Ethical, legal and technical opportunities and challenges.”
38. Winfield and Jirotka. “Ethical governance is essential to building trust in
robotics and artificial intelligence systems,” 2.
39. de Saille, Stevienna. “Innovating innovation policy: The emergence of
‘responsible research and innovation.’” Journal of Responsible Innovation 2,
no. 2 (2015): 152–168.
40. Stilgoe, Jack, Owen, Richard and Phil Macnaghten. “Developing a framework for responsible innovation.” Research Policy 42, no. 9 (2013): 1570.
41. Dignum. Responsible artificial intelligence. How to develop and use AI in a
responsible way. Cham: Springer, 2019, 6.
42. Dignum. Responsible artificial intelligence. How to develop and use AI in a
responsible way. Cham: Springer, 2019, 6.
43. Winfield and Jirotka. “Ethical governance is essential to building trust in
robotics and artificial intelligence systems.”
44. Winfield and Jirotka. “Ethical governance is essential to building trust in
robotics and artificial intelligence systems.”
45. See e.g. Kuziemski, Maciej and Gianluca Misuraca. “AI governance in the
public sector: Three tales from the frontiers of automated decision-making
in democratic settings.” Telecommunications Policy 44, no. 6 (2020): 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2020.101976; Young, Matthew M., Bullock,
Justin B. and Jesse D. Lecy. “Artificial discretion as a tool of governance: A
framework for understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on public
administration.” Perspectives on Public Management and Governance 2, no. 4
(2019): 301–313. https://doi.org/10.1093/ppmgov/gvz014
46. See e.g. Cihon, Peter, Maas, Matthijs M. and Luke Kemp. “Fragmentation and
the future: Investigating architectures for international AI governance.” Global
Policy 11, no. 5 (2020): 545–556. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12890
47. Ala-Pietilä, Pekka and Nathalie A. Smuha. “A framework for global cooperation on artificial intelligence and its governance.” In Reflections on artificial intelligence for humanity, edited by Bertrand Braunschweig and Malik
Ghallab, 237–265. Cham: Springer, 2021.
48. Taeihagh, Araz and Hazel Si Min Lim. “Governing autonomous vehicles:
Emerging responses for safety, liability, privacy, cybersecurity, and industry risks.” Transport Reviews 39, no. 1 (2019): 103–128. https://doi.org/10
.1080/01441647.2018.1494640
49. See e.g. Cath, Wachter, Mittelstadt, Taddeo and Floridi. “Artificial intelligence and the ‘Good Society’: The US, EU, and UK approach.”
50. See e.g. Galanos, Vassilis. “Exploring expanding expertise: Artificial intelligence as an existential threat and the role of prestigious commentators,
2014–2018.” Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 31, no. 4 (2019):
421–432. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2018.1518521
51. Robinson, Stephen Cory. “Trust, transparency, and openness: How inclusion of cultural values shapes Nordic national public policy strategies for
artificial intelligence (AI).” Technology in Society 63 (2020): 101421. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101421

52 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence
52. Dexe, Jacob and Ulrik Franke. “Nordic lights? National AI policies for
doing well by doing good.” Journal of Cyber Policy (2020): 1–18. https://doi
.org/10.1080/23738871.2020.1856160
53. af Malmborg, Frans and Jarle Trondal. “Discursive framing and organizational venues: Mechanisms of artificial intelligence policy adoption.”
International Review of Administrative Sciences (2021). https://doi.org/10
.1177/00208523211007533
54. Köstler, Lea and Ringo Ossewaarde. “The making of AI society: AI futures
frames in German political and media discourses.” AI & Society (2021):
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-021-01161-9
55. Ossewaarde, Marinus and Erdener Gulenc. “National varieties of artificial intelligence discourses: Myth, utopianism, and solutionism in West
European policy expectations.” Computer 53, no. 11 (2020): 53–61. https://
doi.org/10.1109/MC.2020.2992290
56. Roberts, Huw, Josh Cowls, Jessica Morley, Mariarosaria Taddeo, Vincent
Wang and Luciano Floridi. “The Chinese approach to artificial intelligence:
An analysis of policy, ethics, and regulation.” AI & SOCIETY 36, no. 1
(2021): 59–77. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-020-00992-2
57. Ulnicane, Knight, Leach, Stahl and Wanjiku. “Framing governance for a
contested emerging technology: Insights from AI policy.”
58. Ulnicane, Eke, Knight, Ogoh and Stahl. “Good governance as a response to
discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons for AI from other emerging technologies.”
59. Calo, Ryan. “Artificial intelligence policy: A primer and roadmap.” UC Davis
Law Review 51, no. 2 (2017): 399–435. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3015350
60. Stix, Charlotte. “Actionable principles for artificial intelligence policy: Three
pathways.” Science and Engineering Ethics 27, no. 1 (2021): 1–17. https://doi
.org/10.1007/s11948-020-00277-3
61. Stix, Charlotte and Matthijs M. Maas. “Bridging the gap: The case for an
‘Incompletely Theorized Agreement’ on AI policy.” AI and Ethics (2021):
1–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-020-00037-w
62. See e.g. Broussard, Meredith. Artificial unintelligence: How computers misunderstand the world. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2018; Dwivedi,
Yogesh K., Hughes, Laurie, Ismagilova, Elvira, Aarts, Gert, Coombs,
Crispin, Crick, Tom, Duan, Yanqing, et al. “Artificial intelligence (AI):
Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges, opportunities,
and agenda for research, practice and policy.” International Journal of
Information Management 57 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019
.08.002; Stilgoe, Jack. Who’s driving innovation? New technologies and the
collaborative state. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2020.
63. For an overview, see e.g. OECD. Artificial intelligence in society. Paris:
OECD Publishing, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1787/eedfee77-en
64. See e.g. Ulnicane, Knight, Leach, Stahl and Wanjiku. “Framing governance
for a contested emerging technology: Insights from AI policy.”
65. European Commission. Artificial intelligence for Europe. Communication
COM(2018) 237. Brussels: European Commission, 2018, 1.
66. Cath, Wachter, Mittelstadt, Taddeo and Floridi, “Artificial intelligence and
the ‘Good Society’: The US, EU, and UK approach,” 505.

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 53
67. Galanos, “Exploring expanding expertise: Artificial intelligence as an existential threat and the role of prestigious commentators, 2014–2018.”
68. AI Strategies and Public Sector Components. https://oecd-opsi.org/projects
/ai/strategies/ (Last accessed 15 February 2020).
69. Jobin, Ienca and Vayena, “The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines.”
70. See e.g. Coeckelbergh, AI ethics; Vesnic-Alujevic, Lucia, Nascimento, Susana
and Alexandre Pólvora. “Societal and ethical impacts of artificial intelligence: Critical notes on European policy frameworks.” Telecommunications
Policy 44, no. 6 (2020): 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2020.101961
71. These are: first, the Asilomar AI principles, second, the Montreal declaration for responsible AI, third, the general principles offered in the second
version of Ethically Aligned Design, fourth, the Statement on Artificial
Intelligence, Robotics and “Autonomous” Systems from the European
Commission’ European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies,
fifth, the five overarching principles for an AI code form the UK House of
Lords report AI in the UK: ready, willing and able? and sixth, the tenets of
the Partnership on AI.
72. Floridi, Cowls, Beltrametti, et al. “AI4People—An ethical framework for a
good AI society: Opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations.”
73. Jobin, Ienca and Vayena, “The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines.”
74. Jobin, Ienca and Vayena, “The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines,” 389.
75. Schiff, Daniel, Borenstein, Jason, Biddle, Justin and Kelly Laas. “AI ethics
in the public, private, and NGO sectors: A review of a global document
collection.” IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society 2, no. 1 (2021): 31.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TTS.2021.3052127
76. See e.g. Lee, Kai-Fu. AI superpowers: China, silicon valley, and the new
world order. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018.
77. Schwab, Klaus. The fourth industrial revolution. New York: Penguin, 2017.
78. Henriques, Luisa and Philippe Larédo. “Policy-making in science policy:
The ‘OECD model’ unveiled.” Research Policy 42, no. 3 (2013): 801–816.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.09.004
79. The OECD AI Principles. https://www.oecd.ai/ai-principles (Last accessed
19 April 2021).
80. The OECD AI Policy Observatory. https://www.oecd.ai/ (Last accessed 19
April 2021).
81. The OECD Network of Experts on AI (ONE AI). https://www.oecd.ai/network-of-experts (Last accessed 19 April 2021).
82. Dolowitz, David P. and David Marsh. “Learning from abroad: The role
of policy transfer in contemporary policy-making.” Governance: An
International Journal of Policy and Administration 13, no. 1 (2000): 5–24.
https://doi.org/10.1111/0952-1895.00121
83. European Commission. AI policy seminar: Towards and EU strategic plan
for AI. Digital transformation monitor. Brussels, 29 November 2017.
84. Carter, William A., Kinnucan, Emma and Josh Elliot. A national machine
intelligence strategy for the United States. Washington, DC: Center for
Strategic & International Studies, 2018, 19.

54 ◾ Governance of Artificial Intelligence
85. European Commission. Artificial intelligence: A European perspective.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2018.
86. The Global AI Index. https://www.tortoisemedia.com/intelligence/global
-ai/ (last accessed 15 April 2021).
87. The Government AI Readiness Index. https://www.oxfordinsights.com/
government-ai-readiness-index-2020 (Last accessed 15 April 2021).
88. The AI Index. https://aiindex.stanford.edu/ (Last accessed 15 April 2021).
89. Van Lente, Spitters and Peine. “Comparing technological hype cycles:
Towards a theory.”
90. Rein, Martin and Donald Schön. “Reframing policy discourse.” In The
argumentative turn in policy analysis and planning, edited by Frank Fischer
and John Forester, 145–166. London: UCL Press, 1993.
91. Rein and Schön. “Reframing policy discourse,” 145.
92. Rein and Schön. “Reframing policy discourse,” 146.
93. More on AI policy documents see here See e.g. Ulnicane, Knight, Leach,
Stahl and Wanjiku. “Framing governance for a contested emerging technology: Insights from AI policy.”
94. Executive Office of the President. The national artificial intelligence research
and development strategic plan. Washington, DC: National Science and
Technology Council, 2016, 3.
95. European Commission. Artificial intelligence for Europe, 1.
96. BIC/APPGAI (Big Innovation Centre/All-Party Parliamentary Group on
Artificial Intelligence). International Perspective and Exemplars. 30 October
2017, 10.
97. European Commission. Artificial intelligence for Europe, 1.
98. European Commission. Artificial intelligence for Europe, 2.
99. See e.g. Makridakis, Spyros. “The forthcoming artificial intelligence (AI)
revolution: Its impact on society and firms.” Futures 90 (2017): 46–60.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2017.03.006
100. Winner, The whale and the reactor. A search for limits in an age of high technology, 98.
101. Winner, The whale and the reactor. A search for limits in an age of high technology, 117.
102. BIC/APPGAI (Big Innovation Centre/All-Party Parliamentary Group on
Artificial Intelligence). International Perspective and Exemplars, 4.
103. BIC/APPGAI (Big Innovation Centre/All-Party Parliamentary Group on
Artificial Intelligence). International Perspective and Exemplars, 19.
104. Executive Office of the President. Preparing for the future of artificial
intelligence. Washington, DC: National Science and Technology Council
Committee on Technology, 2016.
105. Larson, Christina. “China’s massive investment in artificial intelligence has an
insidious downside.” Science 8 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat2458
106. RT. “‘Whoever leads in AI will rule the world’: Putin to Russian children
on Knowledge Day.” 1 September 2017. https://www.rt.com/news/401731-ai
-rule-world-putin/ (Last accessed 16 February 2020).

Governance of Artificial Intelligence ◾ 55
107. WEF. “Theresa May’s Davos address in full.” 25 January 2018. https://www
.weforum.org/agenda/2018/01/theresa-may-davos-address/ (Last accessed
16 February 2020).
108. Rabesandratana, Tania. “Emmanuel Macron wants France to become a
leader in AI and avoid ‘dystopia.’” Science 30 (March 2018). https://doi.org
/10.1126/science.aat7491
109. European Commission. Artificial intelligence for Europe, 19.
110. European Commission. Artificial intelligence: A European perspective, 12–13.
111. E.g. Allen, John and Amir Husain. “The next space race is artificial intelligence.” Foreign Affairs, 3 November 2017; Horowitz, Michael, Kania,
Elsa B., Allen, Gregory C. and Paul Scharre. Strategic competition in and
era of artificial intelligence. Washington, DC: Centre for a New American
Security, 25 July 2018.
112. Krugman, Paul. “Competitiveness: A dangerous obsession.” Foreign Affairs
73, no. 2 (1994): 28–44.
113. Nelson, R. Richard. The Moon and the Ghetto. An essay on public policy
analysis. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1977.
114. Stilgoe, Who’s driving innovation? New technologies and the collaborative
state, 51.
115. Information from the European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/digital
-single-market /en/news/eu-member-states-sign-cooperate-artificial-intelligence (Last accessed 16 April 2019).
116. See e.g. Cihon, Maas and Kemp. “Fragmentation and the future:
Investigating architectures for international AI governance.”
117. The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence. https://gpai.ai/ (Last
accessed 20 April 2021).
118. Feijóo, Claudio, Kwon, Youngsun, Bauer, Johannes M., Bohlin, Erik, Howell,
Bronwyn, Jain, Rekha, Potgieter, Petrus, Vu, Khuong, Whalley, Jason, and
Jun Xia. “Harnessing artificial intelligence (AI) to increase wellbeing for all:
The case for a new technology diplomacy.” Telecommunications Policy 44,
no. 6 (2020): 2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2020.101988
119. Carter, Kinnucan and Elliot. A national machine intelligence strategy for the
United State, 42–45.
120. Rabesandratana. “Emmanuel Macron wants France to become a leader in
AI and avoid ‘dystopia.’”
121. Merton, Robert. “The normative structure of science.” In The sociology of
science. Theoretical and empirical investigations, edited by Robert Merton
and Norman Storer, 267–278. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press,
1973 [1942].
122. Executive Office of the President. The national artificial intelligence research
and development strategic plan.
123. European Commission. Artificial intelligence for Europe, 5.
124. European Commission. Artificial intelligence for Europe, 13.
125. Ulnicane, Eke, Knight, Ogoh and Stahl. “Good governance as a response to
discontents? Déjà vu, or lessons for AI from other emerging technologies.”

