Journal of Contemporary
European Research
Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015)

Introduction

New Horizons in the Europe of Knowledge
Meng-Hsuan Chou Nanyang Technological University
Inga Ulnicane University of Vienna

Citation
Chou, M.-H. and Ulnicane, I. (2015). Introduction: New Horizons in the Europe of Knowledge ,
Journal of Contemporary European Research. 11 (1), pp. 4-15.
First published at: www.jcer.net

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

This special issue introduces the themes and dynamics of European integration in an increasingly
important and rapidly evolving policy domain on the global political agenda: knowledge policies.
Knowledge policies such as research and higher education remain under-examined issue areas in
mainstream European studies. Yet their centrality to the governance of academic life, economic
growth, market positioning, innovation capacity in Europe and beyond have only grown in significance
throughout the last decade. Hence, to work in academe and to understand Europe, it is essential to
know the Europe of Knowledge in the making.
This editorial introduces the notion of the Europe of Knowledge and places it in the European
integration research agenda. We first describe what the concept means before suggesting how to
approach the Europe of Knowledge as a new case for investigating European integration dynamics.
This discussion revolves around the evolution of policy developments in research and higher education
to show how knowledge policies are compound and manifest distinct dimensions of differentiated
integration and experimentation, both fruitful theoretical research agendas. We then summarise the
articles to show the respective Europe of Knowledge themes they highlight. We conclude by
considering how the Europe of Knowledge in the making encourages testing established empirical and
analytical assumptions about European integration and experimenting with emerging ideas about
regional cooperation from around the world.

BOUNDARIES OF THE EUROPE OF KNOWLEDGE IN THE MAKING
The phrase Europe of K o ledge is a erita le o ple a d allea le ter (Elken et al. 2011: 5).
While we can tra e its politi al a d supra atio al origi to the Europea Co
issio s
Co
u i atio o To ards a Europe of K o ledge (European Commission 1997), national and
supranational policy actors have, in the main, interpreted the term differently since then. For instance,
in the 1997 Communication, we see the European Union (EU) executive referring to the Europe of
K o ledge as a ope d a i Europea edu atio al area Europea Co
issio
: ), while in
it used the ter Europe of i o atio a d k o ledge as a synonym for the European Research
Area (ERA) (European Commission 2000). By contrast, national policy actors such as the European
education ministers, at their signing of the 1998 Sorbonne Declaration, contrasted the Europe of
Knowledge agai st the Europe of the Euro “or o e Joi t De laratio
). As Meng-Hsuan Chou
and Åse Gornitzka (2014: 8) conclude, at least four visions can be associated with the Europe of
Knowledge: as the asis for a k o ledge-based economy [or society]; as an instrument for
invigorating and increasing the competitiveness of European science; and as a tool for informed policyaki g a d i ple e tatio .
So how can we begin to understand and study the Europe of Knowledge? We argue that it is best to
approa h it as a area i the aki g with contested boundaries. Specifically, we delineate three sets
of boundaries as useful starting points for investigation: policy boundaries (research vs. higher
education vs. others); political boundaries (national vs. supranational vs. transnational); and
geographical or membership boundaries (EU vs. Europe vs. global). Below, we discuss how each set
of boundaries has changed over time. It is at these boundary intersections that European integration
students would find most interesting for theoretical examination and experimentation – a point to
which we shall return in the concluding section.

5

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

Policy boundaries
Which policy sectors make up the Europe of Knowledge? The conventional understanding is that the
Europe of Knowledge has two main policy pillars, each also a Europea area in the making: the
European Research Area and the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) (cf. Elken et. al. 2011; Chou
and Gornitzka 2014). The argument goes that ERA and EHEA policy developments constitute the
formation of the Europe of Knowledge. Yet knowledge policies are not so clear-cut. Several European
research and higher education initiatives (e.g. Framework Programmes, FP; Scientific Visa) are closely
related to, or implemented in, other EU policy sectors (regional; information and communication
technology; enterprise; migration; development; or external action). Moreover, from a sequential
perspective, the emergence and evolution of the Europe of Knowledge can be debated. Indeed, the
ideas of reati g a o
o s ie tifi spa e Guzzetti 1995; Chou 2014) or a Europea U i ersit
(Corbett 2005) have been in circulation since the beginning of European integration. Furthermore, the
Innovation Union agenda has included the delivery of the ERA as part of its overall objectives since
2010 (European Commission 2010). Our narrative about the Europe of Knowledge does not aim to
settle these debates. Instead, we provide the broad strokes of these developments and invite readers
to investigate the details of these stories.
The Founding Fathers saw research policy cooperation as essential for European integration,
espe iall as the e gi e for Europe s then economic recovery and subsequent industrial growth.
Indeed, we find references in the Paris and Rome Treaties for European research and technology policy
cooperation. The member states were, however, keen to retain control over this cooperation and thus
pursued joint collaboration on selected thematic areas (e.g. health, environment, agriculture, energy).
They alone, sitting in the Council of Ministers, decided the range and scope of European research
policy cooperation; the European Parliament and the Commission would play limited advisory roles
(Chou 2012). By January 1974, the research ministers adopted four resolutions that led to the creation
of the Scientific Technical Research Committee (now European Research and Innovation Area
Committee) – an advisory body; the European Science Foundation (ESF) outside of the supranational
framework; a research programme for forecasting, assessment, and methodology; and an initial
outline programme in science and technology (de Elera 2006: 561). Álvaro de Elera (2006: 561)
concludes that For al ost a decade the cooperation in the field of research was to be based on these
four resolutio s: a fee le asis that rought si ilarl fee le results .
It is important to point out that the European governments established many multilateral research
collaborations outside of the supranational framework. For instance, joint research infrastructures
(reactors, accelerators, telescopes, laboratories) and funding schemes such as the: European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in 1954; European Southern Observatory (ESO) in 1962;
European Space Agency (ESA) in 1964; Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL) in 1967; European Cooperation in
Science and Technology (COST) framework in 1971; European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) in
1974; EUREKA intergovernmental organisation for market-driven industrial research and development
in 1985; European Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (ESRF) in 1994; X-ray Free Electron Laser
(European XFEL) and the European Spallation Source (ESS) currently under construction (Hallonsten
2012).
The intergovernmental nature of European research policy cooperation notably changed in the 1980s
when the Commissioner for Industry proposed bundling up existing programmes into the multi-annual
research Framework Programme. Known sequentially (FP1, FP2 etc.) up to 2014, the Horizo
became the eighth FP with a budget of nearly €
illio to be distributed until 2020. This
programmed approach to European cooperation, according to Thomas Banchoff (2002), consumed
the Commission Directorate-General (DG) of ‘esear h s ureau rati apa it . He argues that this,
together with the resear h o
u it s e thusias for Europea fu di g, made reforming European
research policy beyond the FP structure difficult (cf. Banchoff 2002; Chou 2012). The ERA initiative,

6

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

which the Commission launched in 2000 with the e er states support, sought precisely to usher
in the reforms that would change European research policy fro a spe di g poli
to one that
regulated research practice. The EU e e uti e s atte pt failed early on (see below) and a softer
multi-layered and partnership approach has been preferred to this day.
The EU has no regulatory competence in education policy, which the Founding Fathers saw as central
to constructing their nations and cultivating civic belonging among their nationals. The Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU continues to uphold this subsidiarity principle:
The Community shall contribute to the development of quality education by encouraging co‐
operation between Member States and, if necessary, by supporting and supplementing their
action, while fully respecting the responsibility of the Member States for the content of
teaching and the organisation of education systems and their cultural and linguistic diversity
(Official Journal of the European Union 2010: C 83/120).
Ho the do e a ou t for the EU s growing involvement in the education policy sector? Chou and
Gornitzka (2014: ) tell us that One pathway of European involvement in higher education was
through its policy towards mutual recognition of professional degrees and free movement of skilled
manpower . European integration scholars would be familiar with the spill-over effects as a result of
realising the four freedoms. Most scholarly works on European higher education policy cooperation
trace this competence tug-of- ar et ee EU e er states and the Commission, and credit task
expansion (Neave 1984; De Wit and Verhoeven 2001) and policy entrepreneurs (especially the
Commission) (Corbett 2003; 2005) in paving the way for further supranational intervention.
Mo ilit a d trai i g progra
es su h as Eras us a d Marie Curie , i orporated into the FP
structure in the 1980s, came to symbolise European higher education policy cooperation until the
1990s. Similar to other aspects of the FPs, negotiations for their renewal were slow and laborious.
Through these programmes, the Commission/EU incentivised students, university staff and
academics, stakeholder associations (e.g. European University Association), transnational expert
communities and national administrations to see the supranational dimension as legitimate in the
education sector (Beerkens 2008; Gornitzka 2009). This is not to say that the Commission did not
attempt to push for more supranational intervention earlier. Indeed, it proposed a Memorandum on
Higher Education in 1991 (European Commission 1991), but the member states opposed the
economic orientation and utilitarian view of higher education supposedl per eati g this do u e t
(Chou and Gornitzka 2014: 10). The Commission was seen to be trespassing on nationally sensitive
policy issues (e.g. teacher training).
What is remarkable about research and higher education policy developments is that they generally
proceeded within their organisational domains, especially in the Commission DGs. This meant that,
unless policy coordination was enforced, these constituent knowledge policies operated within their
own sectoral vacuum . This resulted in what Chou and Gornitzka (2014: 4-7) called i ter-se toral
or horizo tal tensions when the Lisbon Strategy, adopted in March 2000, sought to improve policy
coordination between knowledge policies so that the EU can become the – much quoted – orld s
most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based e o o . As we shall see next, this debate also
concerns delineating the Europe of K o ledge s politi al ou daries.

Political boundaries
Who are the key decision-takers in the Europe of Knowledge? Are they nationally rooted (i.e. European
research, education, or innovation ministers)? Or do they have a supranational affiliation (e.g.
European Commission) or a transnational status (stakeholder groups)? Do their roles change

7

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

depending on the knowledge policy venue where discussions and decisions take place even though
their affiliation remains the same? These questions go to the heart of identifying the Europe of
K o ledge s politi al ou daries a d, as students of EU policy developments know well, animate
European cooperation. By political, we refer to the question of regulatory competence classically
phrased as: Who governs? Chou and Gornitzka (2014: 3) identified the tensions resulting from
redrawing jurisdictional boundaries as erti al te sio s, which reflect pre aili g ideas a out
common problem-solving capacity across member states and in different societal sectors, and the
legiti a of go er i g odes .
Prevailing ideas about education policy were made most apparent in 1998 when the German, French,
Italian and the British higher education ministers signed the Sorbonne Declaration, launching the
Bologna Process in 1999 outside of the supranational institutional framework. Through the
mechanisms of comparable degrees and a two-cycle system for improving student mobility and
employability, the Bologna Process sought to establish an attractive EHEA by tackling a most sensitive
issue: diverse degree structures (Ravinet 2009; Gornitzka 2010). While remaining a transnational
process, the Bologna Process has changed over time (see also membership below). Participation is
voluntary, but Pauline Ravinet (2009) tells us that Bolog a s o -binding characteristics and modes of
translating agreed objectives have achieved far more than what the Commission could have ever
o sidered feasi le ithi the EU s i stitutio al structure. Its effectiveness, in terms of contributing
to policy convergence among Bologna member states, should not be automatically assumed (Witte et
al. 2009). Indeed, as Martina Vukasovic (2014) finds, governments and universities alike have explored
the ambiguities of Bologna implementation to usher in various domestic reforms (see Bolog a ra d
in Scott 2012).
The EU e er states relu ta e to cede regulatory competence to the supranational institutions is
also visible in the research policy sector. Indeed, even following the launch of the European Research
Area in January 2000, which sought to move away from what the Commission designated as the
+ approa h i.e. the the u er of EU e ers a d the Commission), the member states only
endorsed the Open Method of Coordination (OMC) for constructing the ERA. The OMC is a soft
approach to policy cooperation, relying on voluntary compliance following agreed objectives,
benchmarks, and guidelines [see special issues on the OMC in the Journal of European Public Policy
(2004) and Journal of Contemporary European Research (2006); o soft odes of go er a e i the
Journal of European Integration (2007)]. The OMC s effects on European research policy cooperation
have been mixed (cf. Chou and Real-Dato 2014; European Commission 2014).
By contrast, the OMC had a strong impact on the (higher) education policy sector when the EU
adopted the work programme on Education and Training 2010 ; its renewal as Education and
Training 2020 in 2009 continues to shape the
oder isatio of European (higher) education
systems. DG Edu atio sa the OMC as a ethod for us e ause the Commission now has an entry
to Bologna coordination, hi h as e listed as a i tegral part of the edu atio se tor s o tri utio
to Lisbon [now renewed as Europe 2020] Chou a d Gor itzka
: ). Finally, a Europe of
K o ledge s defi i g feature is the presence of transnational actors who mobilise across policy
venues (e.g. from Bologna to the EU) and, in so doing, contribute to re-drawing its political boundaries
(cf. Elken and Vukasovic 2014). These networks of (academic) experts, stakeholders, and agencies (e.g.
quality assurance) are promising empirical cases for generating testable hypotheses concerning the
role of expertise in complex multi-level governance and integration dynamics [see special issue on
The ‘ole of E pert K o ledge i EU E e uti e I stitutio s i Politics and Governance (2015)].

8

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

Geographical boundaries
Does the Europe of Knowledge refer to a specific geographical area? If so, to where does it extend?
These questions concern membership and access to European policy cooperation – its benefits as well
as costs. Similar to EU membership criteria, the membership to the Europe of Knowledge is not strictly
defined by geographical location. Indeed, many initiatives concerning the Europe of Knowledge are
a ifestatio s of differe tiated i tegratio
here the territorial e te sio of Europea U io
membership and EU rule alidit are i o grue t (Holzinger and Schimmelfennig 2012: 292). For
instance, FP7 included EU member states and 13 Associated Countries (European Commission 2013:
29). In addition, third countries also participate in specific FP funding schemes such as the ERA-Net
scheme for facilitating coordination among national research funders; in a survey carried out in 2006,
20% of the responding ERA-Nets had at least one non-EU partner (Edler 2010: 142). If we consider the
many intergovernmental initiatives in the research policy area, membership becomes very complex.1
Similarly, members of the Bologna Process (and thus the EHEA) include 48 states, the European
Commission, and eight Consultative Members.
Taken together, the geographical spread of the Europe of Knowledge goes far beyond the EU and
wider Europe to encompass Israel, Central Asia (e.g. Kazakhstan) and even Russia. If we add to this the
inter-regional initiatives the Commission launched with other regions (e.g. with Latin America and the
Caribbean – To ards the EU-LAC K o ledge Area ) and FP initiatives such as ERA-Nets, which include
collaboration with China and Canada, its reach can be considered global. While membership to the
Europe of Knowledge (inclusion, exclusion2, and suspension3) would certainly interest most scholars
see forth o i g spe ial issue o The terrai s of the Europe of K o ledge i European Journal of
Higher Education), we hope that the policy and political boundaries discussed here would in particular
engage those working on regional integration – in Europe and beyond.

SPECIAL ISSUE OVERVIEW
The si resear h arti les, t o pra titio ers o
e taries a d three ook re iews in this special issue
complement each other to provide a broad overview of the topical issues on the Europe of Knowledge.
Together, these contributions represent an interdisciplinary effort to draw on the theories and
approaches from European studies, political science, science and higher education studies, sociology
and law. Multiple data sources (surveys, interviews, official documents, and case studies) as well as
research methods (qualitative and quantitative) are used to reveal the contested policy, political, and
geographical boundaries of the Europe of Knowledge.
The first three articles address changing concepts, ideas, and values in European research policy.
Mit hell You g ope s ith a a ou t of ho the o ept of e elle e has ha ged fro FP7 to
Horizo
. Through the role of e elle e on issues of distributive justice and quality
management, Young finds that its conflicting conceptualisation has contributed to a more divided
Europe of Knowledge. Continuing, Inga Ulnicane analyses how the main objectives of the European
Research Area have changed from its launch in 2000 to 2014. Applying a research policy framing
approa h, Ul i a e argues that E‘A s ideatio al fra e ork has roade ed fro its i itial fo us o
economic competitiveness to include ideas of scientific excellence and societal challenges;
relationships between these diverse policy ideas is an important question for future European
research policy. Combining a legal and policy perspective, Andrea Gideon demonstrates how shifting
research policy ideas may lead to unintended (legal) consequences. Showing the growing
o
odifi atio of resear h i Ger a , the Netherla ds, a d E gla d, Gideo suggests that
blurring the boundaries between public and private sector funding could subject the research carried
out in higher education institutions to EU primary law. She argues that this may require higher

9

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

education institutions to behave more like commercial entities, which could intensify existing tensions
between the economic and social rationales of public policies.
The next three articles turn to European (higher) education policy developments and the role of
a iguit i poli i ple e tatio . Mari Elken examines the policy instrument adopted in 2008 for
increasing the transparency of educational qualifications: the European Qualifications Framework
EQF). Ide tif i g this i stru e t s erti al , horizo tal , a d i ter al te sio s, Elke e plai s
how ambiguity was essential for its implementation across heterogeneous national systems. She
o ludes that, although the EQF s i pa t has ee u e e , its gradual a epta e poi ts to
successful EU intervention in a nationally sensitive policy area. Continuing, Amélia Veiga, António
Magalhães, and Alberto Amaral study the Bologna Process as an instrument for establishing the
European Higher Education Area. They extend the concept of differentiated integration to include
poli tra slatio or e a t e t ; this analytical extension allows them to account for how national
and institutional factors contributed to the emergence and subsequent evolution of the EHEA. Finally,
Laura Cruz-Castro and Luis Sanz-Menéndez analyse the implementation of Spanish university reforms
in the last 15 years. They show how Spanish universities responded differently to common policy
pressures even though the general trend concerning academic human resources has seen a rise in
temporary employment contracts.
Two commentaries from practitioners anchor this special issue on the Europe of Knowledge. Drawing
on his former experience as a scientific advisor to the then President of the European Research Council
(ERC), Thomas König tells us how the tensions between scientific and administrative expectations
ere re o iled i the E‘C s da -to-day activities. As a British academic in a world-leading university
in the Europe of Knowledge, Julie Smith reflects on her experiences concerning research networking,
funding, and assessment. She highlights the ever-growing tensions between attempts to deliver
e elle e a d i pa t that ould e fa iliar to olleagues ho u der e t the re e t UK
Research Excellence Framework.
Lastly, the three book reviews offer glimpses into the broader research conducted on the Europe of
Knowledge: vocational training and higher education in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland; the role
of global university rankings and the many challenges they pose for European higher education (policy
and practice); and comparing European research and higher education policy developments from an
institutional perspective. Together, the contributions in this special issue address questions
o er i g the three sets of ou daries of the Europe of K o ledge as ell as raise new ones for
future research.

RESEARCHING THE EUROPE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN EMERGENT AGENDA
What does the Europe of Knowledge in the making offer to practitioners and students of European
integration? This spe ial issue s o tri utio s ha e emphasised the increased significance of
heterogeneity. Countries and universities differ considerably in their historical traditions and
performance (European Commission 2014). Consequently, European research and higher education
policies have had different effects on participating countries (Sharp and Pereira 2001), research
groups, and scientific disciplines (Primeri and Reale 2012). Even in instances where national
knowledge policies converge, the need to pursue tailor-made approaches for country-specific
challenges is highlighted (Izsak et al. 2014). Analysing European research and innovation funding in
times of crisis, Reinhilde Veugelers (2014: 2) identifies a i reasi g i tra-EU split, with the stronger
countries forging ahead and the weaker countries further cutting their ‘&I support . “i ilarl ,
Ulnicane (2015) finds that the recent global economic crisis may further widen the performance gap
between the leading and catching-up countries. The heterogeneity of actors and policy initiatives

10

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

in the Europe of Knowledge has many forms and effects that range from beneficial interactions to
unresolved tensions and potentially detrimental polarisation.
A leitmotif of European integration is how heterogeneity and integration is reconciled or lead to
(further) reconfiguration. This makes the Europe of Knowledge a particularly interesting case for ongoing theoretical debates about European integration. For instance, as noted earlier, the changing
membership to the Europe of Knowledge offers opportunities to conceptualise the causes and effects
of differentiated integration; specifically, to refine models of multispeed Europe, flexible integration,
and variable geometry (Holzinger and Schimmelfennig 2012). Similarly, those interested in the
concept of experimentalist governance would find the design and implementation of OMC
instruments in the Europe of Knowledge to be new empirical grounds for assessing multi-level
go er a e as a re ursi e pro ess of pro isio al goal setti g ased o lear i g fro the o pariso
of alternative approa hes to ad a i g the i differe t o te t “a el a d )eitli
:
).
Indeed, experimentalist governance can be a very promising approach to studying the Europe of
K o ledge as a iterati e le that tra sfor s di ersit fro a o sta le to integration into an asset
for its ad a e e t “a el a d )eitli
:
).
This spe ial issue s o tri utio s ha e also highlighted the roles of ideas, alues, a d a iguit i
constructing the Europe of Knowledge and why research on the cognitive dimension is needed.
E aluatio has e o e a i porta t part of a ou ta ilit i toda s a ade ia and research funding,
but it is crucial to reflect on the underlying aims of research and higher education policies – national
or European. For instance, is the increasingly quantitative approach to knowledge production and
assessment, as exemplified by global university rankings and the UK s ‘esear h E elle e Fra e ork,
meeting student needs or solving gra d societal challenges? Another fascinating area of research
would be investigating how European policy ideas interact with the (self-)interests of involved actors,
organisations, and countries. In his study of large-scale European science facilities, Olof Hallonsten
:
) fi ds that ost ou tries realize that olla oratio is e essar to a hie e goals e o d
the reach of any one of them, but strong traditions of sovereignty create a constant tension between
self-i terest a d the o
o good . To what extent is this also the case for universities, research
groups, individual researchers, and scholarly networks?
Finally, this special issue identifies the Europe of Knowledge in the making as part of a global
phenomenon of knowledge policy governance. This is hardly surprising given that grand challenges
rarely acknowledge national or regional boundaries. The launch of new initiatives (e.g. Global
Research Council for coordinating global knowledge policy governance in 2012) and the rise of
emerging economies 4 on the global higher education and research landscapes suggest that it is
essential to look beyond Europe. Indeed, it is necessary to compare regional initiatives and examine
the roles of cities, universities, research institutions, large-scale research facilities, public and private
research funding, university rankings, and scholarly networks in the global governance of knowledge.
How Europe adjusts to these myriad factors and actors could very much be the future of European
integration.
***

Acknowledgements
Most articles in this special issue have been presented in panels organised by the University
Association for Contemporary European Studies (UACES) collaborative research network on the
European Research Area in 2013. We appreciate all the participants who have commented and
provided insights that led to this volume. We would like to thank the JCER editors, especially Simona
Guerra for her unflagging awesome support, and the reviewers who have made this possible. Diana

11

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

Beech contributed significantly i prepari g this spe ial issue s proposal. Me g-Hsuan Chou gratefully
acknowledges the research support of Nanyang Technological University, Singapore under its NAP
grant. Inga Ulnicane acknowledges support from the Institute for European Integration Research EIF,
University of Vienna.

Correspondence Address
Meng-Hsuan Chou, School of Humanities and Social Sciences (HSS-06-10), Nanyang Technological
University, 14 Nanyang Drive, 637332 Singapore [hsuan@ntu.edu.sg]
Inga Ulnicane, Institute of European Integration Research, University of Vienna, Strohgasse 45/DG,
1030 Vienna, Austria [inga.ulnicane@univie.ac.at]

1 For instance, CERN, EMBL, and ESRF each has 21 member states; ESO has 15; ESA has 20; ILL has three founding countries

and 12 members; XFEL has 10 partner countries; COST has 35 members; EUREKA has 41 member countries (including the
EU); and ESF has 66 member (research funding and performing) organisations from 29 countries. Sources: organisational
websites. Accessed 4 January 2015.
2 Israel has twice applied to become a member to the Bologna Process (in 2007 and 2008), but its application has been
rejected on the basis that it has not signed the European Cultural Convention (a membership criteria).
3 In 2014, the EU temporarily suspended discussions with Switzerland concerning its participation in Horizon 2020 when a
Swiss referendum (50.3 per cent) supported the reintroduction of quotas on the free movement of EU nationals. Source:
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-26225121. Accessed 6 January 2015.
4 The OECD
) esti ates that arou d
Chi a ould e o e the orld s top resear h a d de elop e t spe der,
overtaking the EU and the United States.

12

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

REFERENCES
Banchoff, T. (2002). I stitutio s, i ertia a d Europea U io resear h poli
21.

. Journal of Common Market Studies 40(1): 1–

Beerkens, E. (2008). The emergence and institutionalisation of the European higher education and research area. European
Journal of Education 43(4): 407–424.
Chou, M.-H. (2012). Constructing an Internal Market for Research through Sectoral and Lateral Strategies: Layering, the
European Commission and the Fifth Freedom. Journal of European Public Policy 19(7): 1052-1070.
Chou, M.-H. (2014). The evolution of the European Research Area as an idea in European Integration, in M.-H. Chou and Å.
Gornitzka (eds.) Building the Knowledge Economy in Europe: New Constellations in European Research and Higher
Education Governance. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 27-50.
Chou, M.-H. and Gornitzka, Å. (2014). Building a European knowledge area: an introduction to the dynamics of policy
domains on the rise, in M.-H. Chou and Å. Gornitzka (eds.) Building the Knowledge Economy in Europe: New Constellations
in European Research and Higher Education Governance. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 1-26.
Chou, M.-H. and Real-Dato, J. (2014). Tra slati g the Europea Charter for ‘esear hers a d the Code of Co du t for the
‘e ruit e t of ‘esear hers i atio al are as: Nor a s. “pai , in M.-H. Chou and Å. Gornitzka (eds.) Building the
Knowledge Economy in Europe: New Constellations in European Research and Higher Education Governance. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar: 51-80.
Corbett, A. (2003). Ideas, institutions and policy entrepreneurs: towards a new history of higher education in the European
Community. European Journal of Education 38(3): 315–330.
Corbett, A. (2005). Universities and the Europe of Knowledge: Ideas, Institutions and Policy Entrepreneurship in European
Union Higher Education Policy, 1955–2005. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
de Elera, Á. (2006). The European research area: on the way towards a European Scientific Community?. European Law
Journal 12(5): 559–574.
De Wit, K. and Verhoeven, J.C. (2001). Higher education policy of the European Union: with or against the member states?,
in J. Huisman, P. Maassen and G. Neave (eds.) Higher Education and the Nation State. Amsterdam: Pergamon Press: 175–
231.
Edler, J. (2010). Coordinate to collaborate: the governance challenges for European international S&T policy, in H. PrangeGstöhl (ed.) International Science and Technology Cooperation in a Globalized World. The External Dimension of the
European Research Area. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 135-160.
Elken, M., Gornitzka, Å., Maassen, P. and Vukasovic, M. (2011). European Integration and the Transformation of Higher
Education . Pre-Project: Higher Education and Professional Learning: The Effects of European Integration (The Norwegian
Research Council, 197652). University of Oslo, Department of Educational Research, Oslo.
Elken, M. and Vukasovic, M. (2014). Dynamics of voluntary policy coordination: actors and networks in the Bologna
Process, in M.-H. Chou and Å. Gornitzka (eds.) Building the Knowledge Economy in Europe: New Constellations in European
Research and Higher Education Governance. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar: 131-159.
European Commission (1991). Me ora du
Commission, Brussels.

o Higher Edu atio i the Europea Co

u it

fi al) . European

European Commission (1997). Co
Brussels.

u i atio o To ards a Europe of K o ledge

Fi al) . European Commission,

European Commission (2000). Co
Brussels.

u i atio o To ards a Europea ‘esear h Area

Fi al) . European Commission,

European Commission (2010). Co
u i atio o Europe
fi al) . European Commission, Brussels.

: A strateg for s art, sustai a le a d inclusive growth

European Commission (2013). Europea ‘esear h Area: Fa ts a d Figures

13

. European Commission: Brussels.

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net
European Commission (2014). Co
European Commission, Brussels.

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

u i atio o the Europea ‘esear h Area: Progress ‘eport

Fi al) .

European Journal of Higher Education (2016). Special Issue: The terrains of the Europe of Knowledge (Guest editor: M.-H.
Chou). European Journal of Higher Education 6(3).
Gornitzka, Å. (2009). Networking administration in areas of national sensitivity – the Commission and European higher
education, in A. Amaral, G. Neave, C. Musselin and P. Maassen (eds.) European Integration and the Governance of Higher
Education and Research. Dordrecht: Springer: 109–131.
Gornitzka, Å. (2010). Bologna in Context: a horizontal perspective on the dynamics of governance sites for a Europe of
Knowledge. European Journal of Education 45 (4): 535-548.
Guzzetti, L. (1995). A Brief History of European Union Research Policy, Luxembourg: Office for the Official Publications of
the European Communities.
Hallonsten, O. (2012). Continuity and Change in the Politics of European Scientific Collaboration. Journal of Contemporary
European Research 8 (3): 300-319.
Holzinger, K. and Schimmelfennig, F. (2012). Differentiated integration in the European Union: Many concepts sparse
theory, few data. Journal of European Public Policy 19(2): 292-305.
Izsak, K., Markianidou, P. and ‘adoše ić, “.
). Co erge e of Natio al I o atio Poli Mi es i Europe – Has It
Gone Too Far? An Analysis of Research and Innovation Policy Measures in the Period 2004-12. Journal of Common Market
Studies: forthcoming.
Journal of European Contemporary European Research (2006). Special Issue: The Open Method of Coordination (Guest
editor: K. Armstrong). Journal of Contemporary European Research 2(1): 2-104.
Journal of European Integration (2007). Special Issue: Democracy and Soft Modes of Governance in the EU (Guest editors:
S. Borrás and T. Conzelmann). Journal of European Integration 29(5): 531-633.
Journal of European Public Policy (2004). Special Issue: The open method of co-ordination and new governance patterns in
the EU (Guest editors: S. Borrás and K. Jacobsson). Journal of European Public Policy 11(2): 181-348.
Neave, G. (1984). The EEC and Education. Trentham: Trentham Books.
OECD (2014). OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2014. OECD Publishing.
Official Journal of the European Union (2010). Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:12012E/TXT. Accessed 30 December 2014.
Politics and Governance (2015). Special Issue: The Role of Expert Knowledge in EU Executive Institutions (Guest editors: Å.
Gornitzka and C. Holst). Politics and Governance 3(1): forthcoming.
Primeri, E. and Reale, E. (2012). How Europe Shapes Academic Research: insights from participation in European Union
Framework Programmes. European Journal of Education 47(1): 104-121.
Ravinet, P. (2009). Comment le processus de Bologne a‐t‐il commencé? La for ulatio de la isio d u Espa e
d E seig e e t “upérieur à la “or o e e
. Education et Sociétés 24: 29–44.
Sabel, C. and Zeitlin, J. (2012). Experimentalist Governance, in D. Levi-Faur (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Governance.
Oxford: Oxford University Press: 169-183.
Scott, P. (2012). Going Beyond Bologna: Issues and Themes, in A. Curaj, P. Scott, L. Vlasceanu and L. Wilson (eds.) European
Higher Education at the Crossroads. Dordrecht: Springer: 1-14.
Sharp, M. and Pereira, T.S. (2001). Research and Technological Development, in R. Hall, A. Smith and L. Tsoukalis (eds.)
Competitiveness and Cohesion in EU Policies. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 147-178.
Sorbonne Joint Declaration (1998). Joint Declaration on Harmonisation of the Architecture of the European Higher
Education System by the Four Ministers in Charge for France, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom. Sorbonne: 25 May
1998.

14

Volume 11, Issue 1 (2015) jcer.net

Meng-Hsuan Chou and Inga Ulnicane

Ulnicane, I. (2015). Research and innovation: Source of renewed growth?, in G. Falkner (ed.) European integration in times
of crisis: Constraining and/or facilitating effects on different policies: forthcoming
Veugelers, R. (2014). Undercutting the Future? European Research Spending in Times of Fiscal Consolidation. Bruegel Policy
Contribution. Issue 2014/06. June 2014. Brussels.
Vukasovic, M. (2014). Universities and Public Contestation during Social and Political Crises: Belgrade University in the
1990s. PS: Political Science & Politics 47(3): 616-619.
Witte, J., Huisman, J. and Purser, L. (2009). European higher education reforms in the context of the Bologna process: how
did we get here, where are we and where are we going?, in OECD (ed.) Higher Education to 2030: Volume 2, Globalisation,
Paris: OECD Publishing: 205-229.

15

