PREPRINT: Ulnicane, I. (2023) Politics of Public Research Funding: the case of the European Union.
In: Lepori B., Jongbloed B., and Hicks D. (Eds) Handbook of Public Funding of Research, Edward Elgar
Publishing, pp.55-71. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781800883086.00009

Politics of public research funding: the case of the European Union
Inga ULNICANE
Abstract: This chapter examines the politics of public research funding by focusing on one of the
most prominent international initiatives, namely the European Union’s Framework Programme. It
investigates how over the years policy frames combining certain values and interests have
contributed to the emergence and expansion of the EU public research funding. If the initial
establishment EU research policy was largely driven by economic frame, then in recent decades its
further expansion has been facilitated by two additional – scientific excellence and societal
challenges – frames. Although similar frames can be encountered at national level, specific feature
of EU research policy is that the EU level cooperation, coordination, and competition are seen as
solutions to economic competitiveness, scientific excellence, and societal challenges. While public
research funding typically is analysed from technocratic perspective, this chapter highlights the need
to examine the role of political priorities, values, and interests in research policy and funding.
Keywords: EU research policy; Framework Programme; policy framing; European Research Area;
economic competitiveness; societal challenges

‘...research policy has become of one of the EU’s core instruments for advancing its policies,
promoting European integration, and achieving change. It has won the support of researchers, both
in Europe and beyond, gained prestige, and found a solid place on the EU political agenda. With its
extensive programs and significant funding, it has transformed the European research landscape for
good. However, to remain relevant, the EU research policy needs to be tailored to serve the most
compelling needs of the European societies. If designed right, it can be a powerful force, enabling
critical and truly transformative effort for which none of the individual member states would be
capable alone.’ (Mitzner, 2020, p.276)

Introduction: EU research policy as a success story?
While in developed countries research policy and funding tends to be predominantly decided at
national level, there is a number of emerging international science policy and funding initiatives.
Such initiatives are particularly relevant in the area of research because the scientific community has
a long-standing tradition of collaborating across borders (Kastenhofer & Molyneux-Hodgson, 2021;
1

Nedeva, 2013). So far emerging international research policy and funding initiatives tend to be small
and fragmented, with the European Union (EU) being the major exception.

Since the 1980s, the EU research policy has experienced major growth in terms of increase in EUlevel competencies, funds, initiatives and instruments. Over the past 40 years, EU research funding
programme, known as the European Union Framework Programme (EU FP), has grown considerably
from 3 billion Euros allocated for the first EU FP for research and development (1984-1987) to
almost 100 billion Euros assigned for the current ninth EU FP (2021-2027), known as Horizon Europe
(European Commission, 2021). Moreover, research at the EU level is funded not only through the EU
FPs but also through other programmes, in particular, the Structural Funds for regional development
and the recently launched European Defence Fund for defence research. The EU research policy has
become the third largest item on the EU budget after agriculture and structural funds (Ulnicane,
2016a). Research policy is seen as a success story of European integration where it represents ‘an
area of sustained growth and impact’ (Mitzner, 2020, p.1).

How to explain the establishment and continuous expansion of EU research policy as a major
example of international research policy and funding? This chapter examines this question by
applying a constructivist lens of policy framing that in particular considers political and social aspects
of policy design (Rein & Schon, 1993, 1996; Schon & Rein, 1994). Policy framing approach focusses
on how in policy practice, policy stories influence the shaping of laws, regulations, allocation
decisions, institutional mechanisms and incentives. Policy frames, which integrate facts, values,
theories, and interests, help to structure and inform policy debates and practice, which are situated
in a specific political and historical context.

Examining research policy through the lens of policy frames helps to uncover political and social
aspects of designing research policy and funding programme. Thus, rather than perceiving design of
2

research funding programmes as purely technocratic activity driven by increasingly questioned
economic ideas such as market failure, government failure and public goods (Bozeman, chapter 2 in
this Handbook; Mazzucato, 2021), this chapter uses policy framing lens to examine political and
social aspects of designing research policy and funding in a specific historical context. The idea that
research investments can be seen as ‘a continuation of politics by other means’ (Elzinga, 2012,
p.416) helps to investigate the case of the EU, where the establishment and expansion of research
policy and funding has been part of political European integration process. Thus, this chapter
examines the role of policy framing in structuring the design of EU research policy and funding.

The chapter draws on an extensive and growing but fragmented literature on EU research policy and
funding. Typically, this literature originating from various disciplines including political science,
history and economics focusses on specific EU initiatives and funding instruments. This chapter
integrates this disperse literature to examine the role of framing in the establishment and growth of
EU research policy.

This chapter proceeds as follows: first, an overview of the establishment and growth of EU research
policy is provided; second, the conceptual lens of policy frames and their use in research policy is
introduced; third, various frames of EU research policy and their role in the growth of this policy
area is examined; and finally, key findings are discussed.

Establishment and growth of EU research policy
Today the EU’s research funding programme is largely taken for granted. However, in the early days
of European political and economic integration in the 1950s, the establishment of EU research policy
was far from obvious. Back then, almost all decisions about research and its funding remained at
national level. To understand the contested origins of EU research policy (Mitzner 2020), it is
important to pay a close attention to the political and historical context of European integration.
3

The establishment and growth of EU research policy is intertwined with European integration
process. Broadening, deepening and expansion of European integration provided opportunities for
the launch and growth of new initiatives and programmes in the area of research. New EU treaties,
competencies, enlargements and political priorities shaped the evolution of EU research policy. Since
the initial Treaties on European integration in the 1950s, research policy has emerged and expanded
gradually (see Table 1). To introduce the political and historical context of the establishment and
expansion of EU research policy, four key developments are presented here: 1) mixed beginnings
within and outside the European Communities 1950s-1970s; 2) establishment and expansion of EU
research funding programme since the 1980s; 3) establishment and expansion of the EU legal
competencies in area of research; and 4) expansion of new types of instruments in 2000s.

Year

Launch of milestones in research policy

Initiative

1950s-

Mix of initiatives within and outside the

Euratom (European Atomic Energy

1970s

European Communities framework

Community) Treaty

1984

EU research funding

Launch of the Framework Programme

1987

EU competence in the area of research

Introduction of legal competence in
research in the Single European Act

2000

New types of instruments

Launch of the European Research Area

Table 1 Key milestones in history of EU research policy (own compilation)

Mixed beginnings within and outside the European Communities 1950s-1970s
The first decades of the European integration in 1950s in the area of research can be characterized
by a mix of limited research policy within the newly launched European Communities (as
predecessors of the European Union were known), and a number of ad hoc intergovernmental
initiatives outside the European Communities framework.

4

While in the field of research there is a long tradition of international cooperation at the level of
scientific community (Kastenhofer & Molyneux-Hodgson, 2021) and integration in terms of
technological infrastructures (Misa & Schot, 2005), the initial Treaties on European integration in the
1950s paid little attention to research policyi. The exception was the Euratom Treaty on the
European Atomic Energy Community in 1957 that among other things aimed to promote research in
the field of nuclear energy. Experience of the Euratom provided important legacy for future
development of EU research policy (Mitzner, 2020). The 1960s and 1970s also saw establishment of
the first institutions in the field of research such as the Directorate General for Research at the
Commission and the committee of member state and Commission representatives known as PREST
(Politique de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique) and later as CREST (Comité de la Recherche
Scientifique et Technique) to advice the Council of Ministers and the Commission.

However, from the 1950s until the 1970s most joint European cooperation initiatives in the field of
research took place outside the Treaties (Cramer, 2020; Cramer & Hallonsten, 2020; Krige, 2003;
Papon, 2009). Such intergovernmental research initiatives included the establishment of large-scale
research facilities such as the European Organization of Nuclear Research CERN in 1954, the
European Southern Observatory in 1962, and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory in 1974
(Ulnicane, 2020). The first joint research funding initiatives also were launched as cooperation
among national governments with major examples being the European Cooperation in Science and
Technology COST in 1971 and the European Science Foundation in 1974.

Important reasons for this initial cooperation taking place outside the Treaties were: first, lack of
legal competencies in the area research policy in the initial Treaties (see above), and second, initially
a small number of member states of the European Community (EC)ii (six in the 1950s and the 1960s,
and nine from 1973iii), while these intergovernmental initiatives typically brought together ten or
5

more countries. Although these initiatives were launched outside the Treaties, the European
Commission and the Council of Ministers have been involved in negotiations preceding some of
these initiatives, over the years have established cooperation with them, and also later developed
new EU policy frameworks for such cooperation, for example, for European Research Infrastructures
(Ulnicane, 2022).

Launch and expansion of European level research funding
Important changes took place in the 1980s when ‘research became a full-fledged EC policy with
sizable budgets, truly ambitious programs, and a more strategic approach’ (Mitzner, 2020, p.231)
bringing together the various plans and scattered initiatives of the previous twenty years (Mitzner,
2020, p.261). A major milestone was the launch of the EU FP for funding research and innovation in
1984. As mentioned in the introduction, over the past 40 years the amount of funding allocated to
multi-annual FPs has increased considerably. While the subsequent FPs were typically known by
their numbers from FP1 (1984) until FP7 (2007-2013), the two most recent programmes are known
as Horizon 2020 (2014-2020) and Horizon Europe (2021-2027). The Horizon 2020 amounted to
approximately 8% of the EU multi-annual budget for 2014-2020 (Ulnicane, 2016a). Participation in
FPs is open not only to the EU member states but also to non-EU countries (Cavallaro & Lepori,
2021; European Commission, 2020). In Horizon 2020, 16 associated countries participated fully or
partially (Ulnicane, 2020).

The expansion of EU FPs has involved the launch of new funding programmes and instruments. A
prominent example of new FP funding instrument has been the launch of the European Research
Council (ERC) in 2007 to fund investigator driven blue-sky research (König, 2017; Nedeva, 2013;
Wedlin & Nedeva, 2015).

6

In addition to the EU FP, the EU also funds research from a number of other programmes. In the
current EU multi-annual budget 2021-2027, funding for research, innovation and technology
features prominently including within the post-Covid recovery agenda Next Generation Europe
(European Commission, 2020). Research and innovation in less developed regions are supported by
the EU Cohesion Policy and Structural Funds (European Commission, 2020; Sharp, 1998). In 2017,
the EU set up the European Defence Fund to fund defence research (Calcara, Csernatoni, & Lavalée,
2020). While the EU FP funds research with exclusive focus on civilian applications, the new
European Defence Fund is a unique example of international funding for defence research, which
traditionally has been seen as a highly sensitive area of national sovereignty. Different EU research
funding programmes have different allocation models. If the EU FP funding is allocated competitively
to research projects at EU level, then the Structural Funds are allocated to regions which then have
their own funding allocation models.

In EU member states with more developed research systems the majority of public research funding
is allocated at national level, and EU programmes provide some additional funds. For example,
during 2007-2013, the FP7 funds typically amounted for approximately 10-20% of government
support for research and development (R&D) in the EU member states (Veugelers, 2014). FP funding
has played an important role in facilitating international research collaborations in Europe (Borras,
2019). During the same time, EU Structural Funds contribution to research and development
amounted to just 1-3% of government support in the most developed national research systems in
Europe such as Sweden, Finland and Denmark, while they constituted over 50% of government
support for R&D in East European member states such as Slovenia and Hungary (Veugelers, 2014).
Against this background, the European Commission has repeatedly emphasized the limits of EU
funding for research and innovation (R&I) and the continuous importance of national funding
reminding that:

7

Horizon Europe and other relevant programmes under the EU budget alone, such as Cohesion Policy
or Next Generation EU, would not be enough to fund the R&I needed for the green and digital
transitions. In order to bring about a real positive change, this must be complemented by investments
from Member States. These efforts combined should crowd in significant private investment to
ensure ownership and quality of results. (European Commission, 2020, p.6)

Establishment and expansion of EU competence in the field of research
If the initial Treaties on the European Communities in the 1950s included hardly any competencies in
research policy (except the Euratom), then soon after the launch of the FP in 1984 the Community
competence for research policy was introduced in the Single European Act (SEA) that came into
force in 1987iv. Although this official introduction of the EC competence in research was legally
important, Veera Mitzner points out that ‘it was more about reaffirmation of established practices
rather than creating truly new ones’ (Mitzner, 2020, p.246). The initially restricted supporting
competencev in this area introduced in the SEA was gradually expanded in the subsequent Treaties
(Mitzner, 2020, p.264). Finally, the most recent Lisbon Treaty that came into force in 2009
introduced a shared competence in this area. Article 179 of the Treaty on Functioning of the EU
defines the aim of EU research policy as follows:
The Union shall have the objective of strengthening its scientific and technological bases by achieving
a European research area in which researchers, scientific knowledge and technology circulate freely,
and encouraging it to become more competitive, including in its industry, while promoting all the
research activities deemed necessary by virtue of other Chapters of the Treaties.

New types of policy instruments
The Treaty mentions the European Research Area (ERA) initiative that was launched by the European
Commission in 2000 and has been portrayed as a new step towards deepening European integration
in research (Borras, 2003; Chou & Gornitzka, 2014; Delanghe, Muldur & Soete, 2009; Edler,
Kuhlmann & Behrens, 2003; Prange-Gstohl, 2010; Ulnicane, 2015). While the main type of policy

8

instruments in EU research policy has been funding and dedicated funding instruments have been
launched in subsequent FPs to implement the ERA, this initiative also introduced a new type of
instrument in this policy area, namely, the Open Method of Coordination. The Open Method of
Coordination is aimed at facilitating coordination among EU member states by setting joint targets
as well as identifying, sharing and learning from good practices. The main example of the Open
Method of Coordination in research policy is the so called 3% target that aims to achieve that
national research and development (R&D) funding is increased to 3% of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). However, this target has been criticized for focusing only on inputs rather than on how
research funding is spent. Moreover, its usefulness and efficiency has been questioned as almost 20
years after setting this target in 2002, it has still not been achieved in many EU countries (Borras,
2019; Ulnicane, 2016a) and in 2018 on average the EU countries were investing 2.19% of GDP in R&D
(European Commission, 2020). Thus, new objectives and instruments introduced by the ERA
initiative are closely connected to funding either by influencing design of the FPs or by aiming to
influence the amount of national research funding.

To summarize, while at the early days of European integration in the 1950s there was hardly any
indication of potential EU research policy, since the 1980s the EU funding, competencies and a range
of instruments in area of research policy have been established and grown considerably. How to
explain this emergence and growth of EU research policy? What role have policy framing played in
it?

A conceptual lens: frames in research policy
The approach of policy framing (Rein & Schon, 1993, 1996; Schon & Rein, 1994) is a fruitful way to
examine political and social dynamics of the growth and evolution of EU research policy and funding.
Policy frames are ‘diagnostic/ prescriptive stories that tell, within a given issue terrain, what needs

9

fixing and how it might be fixed’ (Rein & Schon, 1996, p.89). According to Martin Rein and Donald
Schon (1993),
framing is a way of selecting, organizing, interpreting, and making sense of a complex reality to
provide guideposts for knowing, analysing, persuading, and acting. A frame is a perspective from
which an amorphous, ill-defined, problematic situation can be made sense of and acted on (Rein &
Schon, 1993, p.146)

and in such frames ‘facts, values, theories, and interests are integrated’ (Rein & Schon, 1993, p.145).
Rein and Schon distinguish between two closely connected types of frames – rhetorical and action.
According to them, ‘rhetorical frames are constructed from the policy-relevant texts that play
important roles in policy discourse, where the context is one of debate, persuasion, or justification’
(Rein & Schon, 1996, p.90), while ‘action frames are constructed from the evidence provided by
observation of patterns of action inherent in the practice of policy practitioners’ (Rein & Schon,
1996, p.91).

They associate policy frames with public controversies and pluralism, as ‘in any given issue terrain,
there are almost always a variety of frames competing for both meaning and resources’, where ‘the
contest over meaning gives legitimacy to the claim for economic and social resources’ (Rein & Schon
1996, p.95). According to Schon and Rein, these situated policy controversies with their competing
frames structure policy debates and practices and shape the design of policies (Schon & Rein, 1994;
see also Capano, chapter 8 in this Handbook). For them, design of policy is a social and political
process involving divergent interests and powers of actors. In their approach to policy design, Schon
and Rein emphasize interaction of multiple designers, redesign in use, and shifting contexts. Thus,
this constructivist approach offers an insightful way to analyse research policy frames and their
influence on the design of EU research policy and funding.

10

The concept of policy frames as well as related notions of policy paradigms, discourses, narratives,
rationales, motivations, periodizations and generations have been productively applied to analyse
evolution, growth and changes in science, technology and innovation policy within and beyond the
EU (Aleman-Diaz, chapter 3 in this Handbook; Borras, 2003; Boekholt, 2010; Diercks, Larsen &
Steward, 2019; Elzinga, 2012; Mitzner, 2020; Ulnicane, 2015). Evolution and international diffusion
of science, technology and innovation policy frames have been facilitated by epistemic communities
of experts and policy-makers collaborating in international forums such as the Organization of
Economic Cooperation and Development and the EU. Typical evolution of policy frames is
characterized by moving from science, technology and innovation contributing to economic
objectives towards their role in addressing societal issues in areas such as health, environment and
energy. An example here would be the recent shift towards a transformative innovation policy
paradigm. This shift includes a move from a focus on economic competitiveness and only positive
outcomes of innovation towards highlighting the relevance of science and technology for other
objectives and policy domains (e.g. health, environment) as well as acknowledging both positive and
negative outcomes of innovation, namely, that new technologies can also have harmful effects on
health, safety and environment (Diercks et al., 2019).

This shift from mostly economic focus towards broader societal challenges is sometimes described
as a normative turn (Diercks et al., 2019) emphasizing values and norms underpinning societal
challenges agenda. However, such association of societal challenges with normative turn implies
that previous focus on economic growth and competitiveness is value-free and purely technocratic.
It would be important to recognize normative underpinnings of all frames admitting that traditional
economic focus of research policy is also highly normative prioritizing values of economic growth
and competitiveness, which in the current situation of climate crisis are increasingly questioned.

11

However, the evolution of science, technology and innovation policy frames should not be seen as a
simple linear development from narrow to broader objectives and understandings. It is rather a
process of path-dependence and reinvention of ideas characterized by ‘the continuation and
deepening of old issues in new forms’ (Elzinga, 2012, p.426). Instead of being a rational process of
continuous improvement, changes in science, technology and innovation policy are rather a result of
many complex socially, politically and economically embedded factors (Borras, 2003). This is a highly
relevant insight also for examining the development of EU research policy.

Expansion of EU policy frames and funding programme
What are the dominant EU research policy frames and what role have they played in the
establishment and expansion of EU funding for research? The two recent EU Framework
Programmes have been designed according to the three main policy frames of economic
competitiveness, scientific excellence, and societal challenges. The Horizon 2020 programme (20142020) was organized according to the three pillars of excellent science, societal challenges, and
industrial competitiveness. The current Horizon Europe programme (2021-2027) has three slightly
revised main priorities of excellent science, global challenges and European industrial
competitiveness, and innovative Europe (European Commission, 2021). More than half (53.5 billion
euros) of Horizon Europe’s almost 97 billion euros budget is allocated to the global challenges and
European industrial competitiveness priority, followed by 25 billion euros earmarked for excellent
science, and 13.5 billion euros planned for innovative Europe (European Commission, 2021). Funds
are also allocated for widening participation and strengthening the ERA (3.3 billion euros) and
Euratom (1.3 billion euros) (European Commission, 2021).

What are the key features of these three dominant frames in the recent FPs? The first frame of the
economic competitiveness focusses on the role of EU research policy in contributing to economic
growth and closing the technology gap with the United States and Asia (Mitzner, 2020). The second
12

frame of scientific excellence highlights the EU’s attempts to fund investigator driven ‘blue sky’
fundamental research (König, 2017; Nedeva, 2013; Wedlin & Nedeva, 2015). The third frame of
societal challenges (Ulnicane, 2016b) includes joint activities that aim to contribute to major societal
issues and achieving the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (Mazzucato, 2021). While
the economic competitiveness has been a dominant frame facilitating the emergence and expansion
of EU research policy since the early days of European integration, the other two - scientific
excellence and societal challenges - frames have acquired prominent positions and resources in the
past 15 years (see information on Horizon 2020 and Horizon Europe above).

These three frames draw on old and new ideas in European integration and science, technology and
innovation policy and contribute to further European integration in this area. While similar frames
can also be found in national and international research policy (Aleman-Diaz, chapter 3 in this
Handbook; Diercks et al., 2019), a unique feature of EU research policy is that here the framing of
diagnosis and prescription is related to European integration and cooperation.

Table 2 summarizes these three dominant frames focusing on their background ideas, diagnosis of
the problems and corresponding prescriptions for tackling them. Below, each of these frames and
their role in EU research policy is explained in more detail examining how they have emerged and
developed in particular political and historical context, what ideas, beliefs and values they entail,
and how they have shaped EU research policy and funding.

Frame

Background ideas

Diagnosis

Prescription

Economic

Research as a source

EU is lagging behind

EU will be more

competitiveness

of economic growth;

because it is too

economically

Technological gap

13

between EU and

fragmented and

prosperous and

others – US, Japan,

invests too little in R&I

internationally

China

competitive if it has
EU-level competencies
and initiatives in
research; coordinates
and cooperates more

Scientific excellence

‘Republic of Science’

Scientific elite

EU supports

(Polanyi 1962),

dissatisfied with

investigator-driven

academic freedom,

perceived quality,

fundamental research

self-governance of

applied orientation &

allocated

scientific community

top-down nature of

competitively on EU

FPs

level based on
scientific excellence

Societal challenges

Societal function of

Research has to

Joint EU activities to

research (Bernal

address major societal

address Grand societal

1939), social relevance challenges that

challenges & UN SDGs

require efforts beyond
national capacity
Table 2 Dominant frames in EU research policy

Economic competitiveness
The economic competitiveness frame is a long-standing driver behind the establishment and
expansion of EU research policy (Mitzner, 2020). According to this frame, research is seen as a major
contributor to economic growth and productivity which are considered to be desirable political
goals. In this context, research becomes a key ingredient of the discourse of international economic

14

competitiveness. Economic competitiveness discourse has been popular around the world including
in the United States which have experienced their own concerns about a Japanese ‘threat’ in the
1980s and more recently about China’s growth (O’Mara, 2019). While this international economic
competitiveness narrative has been criticized pointing out that countries do not compete like
companies and international economy is not a zero-sum game (Krugman, 1994), it continues to
dominate policy and media discussions.

In Europe, the economic competitiveness discourse has focused on the EU’s standing vis-à-vis major
global powers such as the US and Asian countries. One of the key concerns in this discourse has been
the technology gap, where Europe is portrayed as lagging behind other global powers. The typical
diagnosis for this gap is that Europe is too fragmented and is not investing enough in research and
innovation. Accordingly, the prescription has been that in order to be competitive and catch-up with
other countries, Europe should cooperate and coordinate more, and have the necessary legal
competencies and ambitious initiatives in this area. Mitzner (2020) explains the historical role of the
technology gap narrative in the establishment of EU research policy as follows:
… the gap became a political imperative in European integration. The basic argument was
straightforward: science had expanded exponentially and now required resources that not even the
largest European states could provide on their own. In the world of “big science,” national efforts
remained too fragmented and insufficient, while European firms lacked the critical scope to
successfully face global competition. So, for the promoters of integration, the problem of the gap was
first and foremost a problem of a scale. The American advantage not only stemmed from generous
government spending, but also from the sheer size of the country and its powerful companies, which
were big enough to undertake large scale research and enter large markets. [..] this argument was
adopted by a number of politicians, public officials, and other actors promoting a “common research
policy” within the framework of the European Community. (Mitzner, 2020, p.49-50)

15

The policy frame of economic competitiveness and technology gap demonstrates a strong continuity
from early discussions about the need to establish a European research policy in the 1960s (Mitzner,
2020) until the most recent EU research policy documents (European Commission, 2020). In the
1960s, focus on the utilitarian idea of research as contributor to economic growth was important
due to then rather limited competencies of the European Community that were largely focusing on
promoting economic cooperation and prosperity. Framing research as essential for economic growth
and competitiveness allowed to consider European activities in the area in times, when there was no
European research policy. Ideas of European cooperation in research as a way to increase economic
competitiveness and to close the technology gap provided an important rationale for launching
European funding and establishing legal competencies in the area of research in the 1980s. If in the
1960s early discussions about European research policy were fuelled by fears about lagging behind
the US, then the launch of the major milestones of European research policy in the 1980s were
accompanied also by new worries about Japanese domination in new technologies (Mitzner, 2020;
Sandholtz, 1992).

The economic competitiveness and technology gap discourse was also at the core of launching the
European Research Area (ERA) initiative in 2000. It was framed in terms of the urgent need for joint
action to improve Europe’s competitive position and close the gap with the US and Japan, in
particular in areas some of which have been of concern already since the 1960s (Mitzner, 2020) such
as public and private expenditure on research and development, employment of researchers in
industry, and trade in high-tech products (Ulnicane, 2015). To address the usual ‘suspects’ behind
the gap, such as the lack of coordination and investment, the ERA initiative suggested policy
coordination measures and in 2002 declared the so-called ‘3% target’ of national research and
development funding reaching 3% of GDP to catch up with the US and Japan. The EU has recently
reaffirmed the aim to achieve the 3% target, even though in the past 20 years progress towards this
controversial target (Borras, 2019; Ulnicane, 2015, 2016a) has been limited and the R&D funding
16

level in Europe still lags behind the US, Japan, South Korea and China (European Commission, 2020).
The economic competitiveness rationale for EU research coordination and cooperation in the early
years of the ERA was reinforced by its close links to the EU’s Lisbon strategy also launched in 2000
and aiming to make the EU the most competitive knowledge-based economy by 2010 (Ulnicane,
2015).

While the ambitious goal of the Lisbon strategy was never achieved, the discourse of economic
competitiveness has continued to dominate EU policies, including in the area of research. It was
prevalent during the post-2008 financial crisis recovery when the EU policy presented research and
innovation as sources of renewed economic growth (Ulnicane, 2016a). In times of austerity, the EU
increased its funding for research seeing that as a source of economic growth and competitiveness
vis-à-vis the US, Japan and China. Similarly, recent EU policy documents present research not only as
a part of the post-Covid recovery but also as a crucial ingredient for the agenda to close the
persistant technological gap with other major powers (European Commission, 2020).

The continuity of the economic competitiveness and technological gap frame in EU research policy is
remarkable. Already over some 60 years it has served as a major driving force for the establishment
and continuous expansion of EU research policy.

While in the past 20 years two additional frames of scientific excellence and societal challenges have
emerged and facilitated further expansion of EU research policy, this traditional frame of economic
competitiveness and technology gap still has a strong presence in today’s policy-making in the area
of EU research.

17

Scientific excellence
In addition to the traditionally dominant frame of economic competitiveness in EU research policy,
the discourse of scientific excellence gained support in the early years of the 21st century. Largely
promoted by the scientific elite, this policy frame draws on ideas about the importance of selfgovernance, autonomy and independence of the scientific community that have been well-known
since Michael Polanyi’s work on the Republic of Science (1962). The scientific excellence frame in EU
research policy largely evolved during the discussions that preceded establishment of the European
Research Council (ERC) in 2007 as the main instrument to fund excellent science at the EU level
(König, 2017; Nedeva, 2013).

Discussions before the establishment of the ERC identified a number of shortcomings in EU research
that needed to be fixed. The European scientific elite was dissatisfied with the FPs due to their
perceived quality issues, top-down organisation and applied nature (Luukkonen, 2014). The wellknown discourse of the European paradox was challenged. If traditionally it was claimed that Europe
was good at fundamental science but weak in application, then it was increasingly argued that
Europe was lagging behind also in fundamental science (Wedlin & Nedeva, 2015).

As a prescription to these problems, ideas for the ERC were developed to support EU-wide
competition for investigator driven risky and novel ‘frontier research’ based on the sole criterion of
scientific excellence. This included revisiting ideas about ‘European added value’. If previously added
value of EU policy and funding was seen in cooperation and coordination, then now it was extended
to include Europe-wide competition as well (Wedlin & Nedeva, 2015). Ideas about the ERC as an
autonomous governance body where the scientific elite decides funding allocation independently
from policy considerations were developed by learning from the experiences of the US National
Science Foundation and the intergovernmental European Science Foundation (König, 2017; Nedeva,
2013). Thus, also in the scientific excellence frame we see a number of elements of international

18

comparison and global positioning of EU research to play an important role. Huge and highly
competitive investigator-driven ERC grants for blue-sky research have quickly become popular
among the scientific elite, and the ERC has been presented as a success story of EU research policy.

Although the ERC has constituted the core of the excellent science priority in Horizon 2020 and
Horizon Europe programmes, this priority has included also some other actions. The Marie
Sklodowska-Curie Actions providing funding for individual mobility grants and research training
networks fits with the main features of the scientific excellence frame such as scientific freedom and
EU wide competition based on the criterion of scientific quality. Other activities funded under this
priority – research infrastructures and Future and Emerging Technology Flagships (discontinued in
Horizon Europe programme) – are expected to contribute not only to scientific excellence but also to
societal challenges and economic competitiveness (European Commission, 2020; Ulnicane, 2020).

What is common to all scientific excellence funding schemes is a strong presence of and support
from the scientific community or more narrowly scientific elite. If the traditional frame of economic
competitiveness has at least initially been largely promoted by policy-makers and industry
representatives, the more recent emergence of the scientific excellence frame in EU has been coshaped by the scientific community as one of the main stakeholders of expanding EU research
policy.

The scientific excellence frame is largely about supporting fundamental research and academic
freedom, which are some of the most traditional characteristics of research policy (Elzinga, 2012).
However, in EU research policy this frame emerged relatively late. It took more than 20 years from
the launch of the FP to the establishment of ERC. Historically, idea that there should be support for
fundamental research at the EU level was far from obvious. From original focus on economic
integration in Europe, research policy initially emerged to support Europe-wide cooperation for
19

global economic competitiveness and closing technology gap with other major global powers.
Accordingly, support for fundamental research was left for national research funding at the member
state level. The relatively recent EU support for fundamental research emerged due to a novel
excellent science frame challenging established notions and highlighting that the EU is lagging
behind not only in technology but also in science and to address this gap the EU research funding
should not only support cooperation but also the EU-wide competition for individual investigator-led
grants.

Societal challenges
Interestingly, in the early 21st century in parallel to the emergence of excellent science frame in EU
research policy, a completely opposite frame of societal challenges started to develop as well. If
excellent science frame focusses on fundamental research and academic freedom, then societal
challenges frame highlights the need for science to address societal needs and develop according to
societal values. This tension between academic freedom and societal relevance is well-known since
the so-called Bernal-Polanyi debate where the former argued for social function of science (Bernal,
1939), while according to the latter any interference in the self-governing Republic of Science is
potentially harmful for scientific enquiry (Polanyi, 1962).

While the idea that science has to address human needs has a long history (Bernal, 1939), it gained
particular prominence in research policy in the early 21st century when the societal challenges frame
became popular around the world. Societal challenges, also known as Grand Challenges and global
challenges, typically focus on major social issues in areas such as environment, health and energy
through cross-disciplinary and cross-sectoral collaborations (Diercks et al., 2019; Ulnicane, 2016b).
Although the concept of Grand societal challenges has been widely used around the world (Hicks
2016), a unique feature of its framing in EU policy is that the formulation of problems and solutions
is related to European cooperation, namely, societal challenges cannot be tackled by individual

20

nations, they require European cooperation, and EU level funding is provided to address them
(Ulnicane, 2016b).

The concept of societal challenges became part of the EU research policy rhetoric in 2007 when the
ERA Green Paper highlighted that EU research policy should be deeply rooted in European society
and support sustainable development in the fields of major public concern such as health, energy,
and climate change (European Commission, 2007). To optimise EU research policy, this document
called for the systemic identification of major societal challenges relevant to many countries and
requiring research efforts beyond national capacity. To address such common societal challenges,
the Green Paper suggested European research cooperation involving stakeholders and citizens.

Additional impetus for using the Grand Challenges concept in EU research policy came from the ERA
expert group report (ERA expert group, 2008), which followed the Green Paper and argued that the
Grand Challenges concept can provide the content dimension for the ERA as well as help to increase
support and funding for European research. In the context of the ERA expert group
recommendations, the Grand Challenges concept had a role in moving EU research policy beyond a
focus on deficit (e.g. fragmentation and lack of coordination) towards opportunities to jointly tackle
Grand Challenges of climate change, food and energy security. The experts suggested that the focus
on Grand Challenges would help to capture public and political imagination and thus play an
instrumental role in shifting EU budget allocations towards research. This is an interesting example
of explicitly using a particular frame in a highly strategic manner to advocate for the increase in EU
research funding.

The major support for Grand Challenges was announced in the Lund Declaration ‘Europe must focus
on the grand challenges of our time’ adopted during the Swedish Presidency of the Council of the EU
in 2009 (Lund Declaration, 2009). The Lund Declaration called for moving away from rigid thematic
21

approaches towards research priorities based on Grand Challenges in areas such as global warming,
tightening supplies of energy, water and food, ageing societies, public health, pandemics and
security. The Lund Declaration played a key role in the preparation of Horizon 2020, where societal
challenges were one of the three priorities. Within this priority, funding was allocated to seven
broad societal challenges from health and food security to climate action and secure, clean and
efficient energy. These challenges were addressed through a number of instruments supporting
large-scale cross-sectoral cooperation such as Joint programming initiatives and European
Innovation Partnerships (Ulnicane, 2016b).

In the current Horizon Europe programme the global challenges priority is implemented through the
missions-approach. The development of missions-approach in the Horizon Europe has been led by
economist Mariana Mazzucato who sees missions as moonshots similar to the Apollo programme
launched by the US government to put a man on the moon (Mazzucato, 2021). According to her,
missions are bold societal goals which can be achieved by collaboration on a large scale between
public and private entities. This has important implications for the role of public policy in supporting
research. Rather than correcting market failures, mission-oriented research policy is expected to
have more active role in shaping markets, making risky investments and setting direction for
research towards achieving societal goals (Mazzucato, 2021).

In Horizon Europe, missions have been defined in five areas: first, cancer; second, adaptation to
climate change including societal transformation; third, healthy oceans, seas, coastal and inland
waters; fourth, climate-neutral and smart cities; and fifth, soil health and food (European
Commission, 2021). It is expected that tackling these missions will contribute to the goals of major
EU and global initiatives, such as the European Green Deal and the UN SDGs.

22

Thus, the key focus of recent EU policies to address societal challenges, missions and Sustainable
Development Goals is on shaping research towards societal goals and values (see also Bozeman,
chapter 2 in this Handbook). In EU research policy this orientation towards societal values and broad
societal benefits of research have been further enhanced by supporting approaches such as
Responsible Research and Innovation and Open Science that aim to put societal needs at the core of
research (Owen et al., 2021).

Beyond the Framework Programmes: Other EU research policy frames
While the three main above discussed frames dominate the recent EU FPs, some further frames can
also be encountered, in particular in relation to other EU funding programmes for research. Two
frames of cohesion and defence are briefly discussed here.

First, in the shadow of the global competitiveness discourse and concerns about Europe catching up
with other major powers, a very different frame concerning huge differences in research
performance among EU member states has developed (Sharp, 1998). With the EU enlargements to
southern and eastern Europe, the narrative of weaker national research systems catching up with
western and northern countries has become more important. The main instrument to enhance
internal cohesion has been EU regional funds allocating resources for research capacity building
within less developed regions. Some funding for this purpose has also been allocated within the FPs
such as in the widening participation and strengthening ERA package in the current Horizon Europe
programme (European Commission, 2021). Additionally, the EU also provides expert advice and
support for reforming national research systems. Despite the variety of EU support instruments for
weaker research systems over decades, important differences in policies and performance persist
(European Commission, 2020; Ulnicane, 2016a).

23

Second, in recent years a new EU research funding frame has emerged outside the EU FP, which
facilitated the launch of the European Defence Fund in 2017 to fund EU defence research (Calcara et
al., 2020). The emergence of the EU-level funding for defence research was supported by the
discourse that the EU is too fragmented to address new security threats and challenges, and
therefore joint EU defence research is needed. Considering that traditionally defence research has
been perceived as a highly sensitive area of national sovereignty, the launch of the European
Defence Fund is a recent example of EU research funding expanding further into areas that have
previously been sole responsibility of the member states. It remains to be seen if and how the newly
launched European Defence Fund with its explicit focus on defence research will interact with the
FPs that only fund research with an exclusive focus on civil applications. Interestingly, a recent major
document on EU research policy (European Commission, 2020) does not even mention defence
research, leaving open questions about the relationships between different EU research funding
programmes.

Thus, since the 1980s a number of major and minor policy frames have facilitated expansion of EU
research funding within and beyond the FPs and the launch of new EU programmes and instruments
gradually moving into areas that have traditionally been perceived as the realm of national
government funding from investigator-driven fundamental research to joint defence research. It
remains to be seen how recent changes in EU politics, e.g. major revision of EU energy and defence
policies in early 2022 after the Russian invasion in Ukraine will affect future development on EU
research policy and funding.

Conclusions
This chapter has demonstrated how since the 1950s EU research policy as a key example of
international research funding has gradually emerged and expanded in terms of funds,
competencies and policy instruments. Its emergence and expansion have been facilitated by certain
24

policy frames which have been shaped by broader political, economic and social processes within
and beyond Europe. Most prominent among these policy frames has been the economic
competitiveness and technological gap narrative that has portrayed research as a source of
economic growth and highlighted that Europe has been lagging behind other major powers such as
the US and Asian countries. To facilitate research contributing to economic growth and closing the
gap, European policy, cooperation and coordination has been promoted as the main prescription.
More recently two other major frames of scientific excellence and societal challenges have
facilitated further expansion of EU research policy. These three major policy frames have guided the
design of recent FPs.

While similar frames of economic competitiveness, scientific excellence, and societal challenges can
be also found at national level, a unique feature of EU research policy is claim that they cannot be
properly addressed at the level of individual member states and therefore EU level cooperation,
coordination, and competition is needed. If some accounts of development of science policy focus
on common features across countries and regions (Aleman-Diaz, chapter 3 in this Handbook; Elzinga,
2012), then this chapter demonstrates importance of historical and political context. For example,
while academic freedom and science-national defence link are typically seen as traditional and longstanding features of research policy (Elzinga, 2012), then in the case of the EU they started to play
the role relatively recently due to expansion of European integration to new areas.

As can be expected on the basis of policy frames literature, some competition over meaning,
legitimacy and resources can be seen among these three main frames of economic competitiveness,
scientific excellence and societal challenges. However, continuous expansion of policy and increased
funds allocated to recent FPs have also alleviated this competition among the various frames in EU
research policy ensuring that each frame and related stakeholders promoting them get substantial
funding. At the same time, designing the FPs according to the three main policy frames has also led
25

to certain fragmentation in policy practice and academic research, where specific academic and
policy communities focus on a certain frame – be it scientific excellence or mission-oriented policy –
with little cross-fertilization and focus on interaction across different frames.

The question asked at the beginning of this chapter about EU research policy as a success story is not
easy to answer. As argued by Mitzner (2020), continuous expansion and impact of EU research policy
can be seen as a success story. At the same time, more questionable is the success of EU research
policy trying to pursue more or less controversial aims, targets and indicators such as catching up
with US and Asian countries, cohesion among EU counties, and increase of national research funding
to 3% of GDP. The question of what counts as success in international research funding remains
open and invites further public debates and scientific investigation including about norms and values
underpinning not only recent societal challenges frame but also more traditional economic
competitiveness discourse. One direction for such debates and investigation is suggested in the
introductory quote to this chapter that highlights the need for EU research policy to be a
transformative effort serving the needs of the European societies, which are also open to the
debate.

This chapter has highlighted the role of politics in public research funding. While often perceived as
highly technocratic area, this chapter demonstrates how political priorities, values, norms, and
interests have been shaping EU research policy and funding. Political priorities of European
integration and their change over time – from initial focus on peace project and economic
cooperation to more recent prioritization of sustainability and emergence of defence cooperation have had direct impact on the way EU research policy and funding has been established and evolved
over time, exemplifying how research investments play their political role being ‘a continuation of
politics by other means’ (Elzinga, 2012, p.416).

26

Acknowledgments:
This research has benefited from comments on earlier versions presented at the 2021 virtual
conferences of Eu-SPRI (European Forum for Studies of Policies for Research and Innovation) and
UACES (Academic association for Contemporary European Studies).

References:
Bernal, J.D. (1939). The Social Function of Science. The MIT Press.

Boekholt, P. (2010). The Evolution of Innovation Paradigms and their Influence on Research,
Technological Development and Innovation Policy Instruments. In Smits, R.E., Kuhlmann, S., &
Shapira, P. (Eds) The Theory and Practice of Innovation Policy. An International Research Handbook
(p.333-359). Edward Elgar.

Borras, S. (2003). The Innovation Policy of the European Union. From Government to Governance.
Edward Elgar.

Borras, S. (2019). Changes in European research and innovation governance: coordination effect and
membership effects. In Simon, D., Kuhlmann, S., Stamm, J., & Canzler, W. (Eds) Handbook on Science
and Public Policy (pp.401-418). Edward Elgar.

Calcara, A., Csernatoni, R., & Lavalée, C. (Eds) (2020). Emerging Security Technologies and EU
Governance: Actors, Practices and Processes. Routledge.

Cavallaro, M., & Lepori, B. (2021). Institutional barriers to participation in EU framework programs:
contrasting the Swiss and UK cases. Scientometrics, 126(2), 1311-1328.

Chou, M.-H., & Gornitzka, A. (Eds) (2014). Building the Knowledge Economy in Europe. New
27

Constellations in European Research and Higher Education Governance. Edward Elgar.

Cramer, K. C. (2020). A Political History of Big Science in Europe. The Other Europe. Palgrave
Macmillan.

Cramer, K. C., & O. Hallonsten (Eds) (2020). Big Science and Research Infrastructures in Europe.
Edward Elgar.

Delanghe, H., Muldur, U., & Soete, L. (Eds) (2009). European science and technology policy: Towards
integration or fragmentation? Edward Elgar.

Diercks, G., Larsen, H., & Steward, F. (2019). Transformative innovation policy: Addressing variety in
an emerging policy paradigm. Research Policy, 48(4), 880-894.

Edler, J., Kuhlmann, S., & Behrens, M. (Eds) (2003). Changing Governance of Research and
Technology Policy: The European Research Area. Edward Elgar.

Elzinga, A. (2012). Features of the current science policy regime: Viewed in historical perspective.
Science and Public Policy, 39(4), 416-428.

ERA expert group (2008). Challenging Europe’s Research: Rationales for the European Research Area
(ERA). Report.

European Commission (2007). The European Research Area: New Perspectives. Green Paper.
04.04.2007. COM(2007) 161.

28

European Commission (2020). A new ERA for Research and Innovation. Communication. 30.9.2020.
COM(2020) 628.

European Commission (2021). Horizon Europe. Available from https://ec.europa.eu/info/researchand-innovation/funding/funding-opportunities/funding-programmes-and-open-calls/horizoneurope_en Last accessed: 22 June 2021.

Hicks, D. (2016). Grand Challenges in US Science Policy Attempt Policy Innovation. International
Journal of Foresight and Innovation Policy, 11(1-3), 22-42.

Kastenhofer, K., & Molyneux-Hodgson, S. (2021). Community and Identity in Contemporary
Technosciences. Sociology of Sciences Yearbook, Vol.31. Springer.

König, T. (2017). The European Research Council. Polity.

Krige, J. (2003). The Politics of European scientific collaboration. In Krige, J. & Pestre, D. (Eds)
Companion to science in the twentieth century (pp.897-918). Routledge.

Krugman, P. (1994). Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession. Foreign Affairs, 73(2), 28-44.

Lund Declaration (2009). Europe Must Focus on the Grand Challenges of Our Time. The Lund
Conference ‘New Worlds – New Solutions’, July 2009.

Luukkonen, T. (2014). The European Research Council and the European Research Funding
Landscape. Science and Public Policy, 41(1), 29-43.

29

Mazzucato, M. (2021). Mission Economy: A Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism. Allen Lane.

Misa, T. J., & Schot, J. (2005). Inventing Europe: Technology and the Hidden Integration of Europe.
History and Technology, 21(1), 1-19.

Mitzner, V. (2020). European Union Research Policy. Contested Origins. Palgrave Macmillan.

Nedeva, M. (2013). Between the global and the national: Organising European Science. Research
Policy, 42, 220-230.

O’Mara, M. (2019). The Code: Silicon Valley and the Remaking of America. Penguin Press.

Owen, R., von Schomberg, R., & Macnaghten, P. (2021). An unfinished journey? Reflections on a
decade of responsible research and innovation. Journal of Responsible Innovation, 8(2), 217-233.

Papon, P. (2009). Intergovernmental cooperation in the making of European research. In Delanghe,
H., Muldur, U., & Soete, L. (Eds) European science and technology policy: Towards integration or
fragmentation? (pp.24-43). Edward Elgar.

Polanyi, M. (1962). The Republic of Science. Its Political and Economic Theory. Minerva, 1(1), 54-73.

Prange-Gstohl, H. (Ed) (2010). International Science and Technology Cooperation in a Globalized
World. The External Dimension of the European Research Area. Edward Elgar.

Rein, M., & Schon, D. (1993). Reframing Policy Discourse. In Fischer, F., & Forester, J. (Eds) The
Argumentative Turn in Policy Analysis and Planning (pp.145-166). UCL Press.

30

Rein, M., & Schon, D. (1996). Frame-Critical Policy Analysis and Frame-Reflective Policy Practice.
Knowledge and Policy: The International Journal of Knowledge Transfer and Utilization, 9(1), 85-104.

Sandholtz, W. (1992). ESPRIT and the Politics of International Collective Action. Journal of Common
Market Studies, XXX(1), 1-21.

Schon, D., & Rein, M. (1994). Frame Reflection: Toward the Resolution of Intractable Policy
Controversies. Basic Books.

Sharp, M. (1998). Competitiveness and cohesion – are the two compatible? Research Policy, 27, 569588.

Ulnicane, I. (2015). Broadening Aims and Building Support in Science, Technology and Innovation
Policy: The Case of the European Research Area. Journal of Contemporary European Research, 11(1),
31-49.

Ulnicane, I. (2016a). Research and innovation as sources of renewed growth? EU policy responses to
the crisis. Journal of European Integration, 38(3), 327-341.

Ulnicane, I. (2016b). ‘Grand Challenges’ concept: A Return of the ‘Big Ideas’ in Science, technology and
Innovation Policy? International Journal of Foresight and Innovation Policy, 11(1-3). 5-21.

Ulnicane, I. (2020). Ever-Changing Big Science and Research Infrastructures: Evolving European Union
Policy. In Cramer, K. & Hallonsten, O. (Eds) Big Science and Research Infrastructures in Europe (pp.76100). Edward Elgar.

31

Ulnicane, I. (2022). Introduction - technologies and European integrations. In Hoerber, T., Cabras, I.,
& Weber, G. (Eds) Routledge Handbook of European Integrations (pp.199-207). Routledge.

Veugelers, R. (2014). Undercutting the future? European research spending in times of fiscal
consolidation. Bruegel Policy Contribution, Issue 2014/06.

Wedlin, L., & Nedeva, M. (2015). Towards European Science: Dynamics and Policy of Evolving European
Research Space. Edward Elgar.

i

On history of European integration see here https://europa.eu/european-union/about-eu/history_en
Accessed 9 August 2021.
ii
Referring to the development before the Maastricht Treaty adopted in 1992 that established the European
Union, the term ‘European Community’ is used. On history of European integration see here
https://europa.eu/european-union/about-eu/history_en Accessed 9 August 2021.
iii
On the history of EU enlargements see https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/policy/from-6-to27-members_en Accessed 2 August 2021.
iv
On history of EU Treaties see https://europa.eu/european-union/law/treaties_en Accessed 2 August 2021.
v
The EU has the three main types of competencies: exclusive, shared and supporting. They refer to division of
competencies between the EU and its member states. The Single European Act that came into the force in
1987 conferred the Community supporting competence in area of research which meant that the Community
could only support, coordinate or complement the action of the member states in this area. Since the Lisbon
Treaty that came into force in 2009, the EU has a shared competence for research which means that both the
EU and its member states are able to legislate and adopt legally binding texts. Available from https://eurlex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM%3Aai0020 Accessed 2 August 2021.

32

