European
Research Area
Cost of Non-Europe
Report

European Research Area
Cost of Non-Europe Report
In the last Parliament, on 12 February 2014, the Coordinators of the European Parliament’s
Committee for Industry, Energy and Research (ITRE) requested a Cost of Non-Europe report
on an integrated EU Research Area. This request was reaffirmed by ITRE coordinators of the
current legislature at 23 February 2015 and asked for an evaluation of the application and
implementation of the policy framework of the European Research Area (ERA) to be carried
out, as well as for an assessment of possible gains from future action in this area.
This paper has been drawn up by the European Added Value Unit of the Directorate for
Impact Assessment and European Added Value, within the European Parliament’s
Directorate-General for Parliamentary Research Services. Its aim is to help improve
understanding of the subject matter by providing evidence of the specific benefits that could
be achieved through European action.
This assessment builds on expert research commissioned specifically for the purpose and
provided by Dr Inga Ulnicane, Institute for European Integration/University of Vienna,
Simon Broeck, Ockham IPS, and Laura de Haan and Paul Vroonhof, both Panteia. The
commissioned research papers appear at Annexes I to III of this study.

Abstract
This Cost of Non-Europe study examines the state of implementation of the current policy
framework for the establishment of a European Research Area (ERA). The study combines a
backward-looking (ex-post) and a forward-looking (ex-ante) evaluation. While the ex-post
evaluation looks at the implementation of the ERA policy framework, the ex-ante assessment
focuses on potential costs and benefits of possible further policy action. In doing so, it
identifies shortcomings in the ERA policy framework and outlines costs due to the lack of
further action on the issue. The study makes a cautious estimate that the costs linked with
implementation shortcomings of the ERA policy framework could amount to €3 billion per
year.

PE 581.382

1

Cost of Non-Europe Report

AUTHORS
Christian Salm and Thomas Zandstra, European Added Value Unit

ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
This paper has been drawn up by the European Added Value Unit of the Directorate for
Impact Assessment and European Added Value, within the Directorate–General for
Parliamentary Research Services of the Secretariat of the European Parliament.
To contact the Unit, please e-mail EPRS-EuropeanAddedValueUnit@ep.europa.eu

LANGUAGE VERSIONS
Original: EN
Translations: DE, FR

This document is available on the internet at: www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank

DISCLAIMER
The content of this document is the sole responsibility of the authors and any opinions
expressed therein do not necessarily represent the official position of the European
Parliament. It is addressed to the Members and staff of the EP for their parliamentary work.
Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorised, provided the
source is acknowledged and the European Parliament is given prior notice and sent a copy.
Manuscript completed in April 2016. Brussels © European Union, 2016.

PE 581.382
ISBN 978-92-823-9109-9
DOI: 10.2861/895783
QA-02-16-304-EN-N

PE 581.382

2

European Research Area

Table of Contents
Note on methodology .................................................................................................................... 4
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 5
2. Historical Background ............................................................................................................... 7
3. State of Play ............................................................................................................................... 10
4. Shortcomings in the ERA framework and obstacles for implementation ........................ 12
5. Quantifying the Cost of Non-Europe .................................................................................... 16
6. Conclusion: Barriers to be removed ....................................................................................... 17
Annex I - Research Paper on the European Research Area Initiative and the Free
Circulation of Knowledge, by Dr. Inga Ulnicane, University of Vienna .............................. 19
Annex II - Research Paper on the Implementation of an Integrated Research Area, by
Panteia and Ockham IPS ............................................................................................................. 51
Annex III - Research Paper on the Monitoring Mechanisms of the Integrated European
Research Area, by Panteia and Ockham IPS ............................................................................ 97

PE 581.382

3

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Note on methodology
Costs of Non-Europe (CoNE) reports are designed to study the possibilities for economic
benefits and the achievement of a ‘public good’ through common action at EU level. They
attempt to identify policy areas that can benefit from deeper EU integration, where the added
value of action at EU level is potentially significant.
This Cost of Non-Europe report examines the state of implementation of the current policy
framework for establishing a European Research Area (ERA). Furthermore, it identifies the
cost of no European-action on that issue. The study combines a backward-looking (ex-post)
and a forward-looking (ex-ante) evaluation. While the ex-post evaluation looks at the
implementation of the ERA policy-framework, the ex-ante assessment focuses on potential
costs and benefits of possible further policy action. Three external research papers, which are
annexed to this report, were commissioned to provide input to the establishment of this Cost
of Non-Europe study.

PE 581.382

4

European Research Area

1. Introduction
In the view of the European Commission, the future of cooperation in the field of research
and innovation in the European Union (EU) and the wider world is a positive one. A paper
published by the Commission in 2015 describes a possible scenario for science in the year
2030 as follows:
‘Open science has become a reality and is offering a whole range of new, unlimited
opportunities for research and discovery worldwide. Scientists, citizens, publishers, research
institutions, public and private research funders, students and education professionals as
well as companies and citizens from around the globe are sharing an open, virtual research
environment, called the Lab. Open source communities and scientists, publishing companies
and the high-tech industry have pushed the EU and UNESCO to develop common open
research standards, establishing a virtual learning gateway, offering free public access to all
scientific data as well as to all publicly funded research. The OECD (which now includes
Brazil, India, China and Russia), as well as many countries from Africa, Asia and Latin
America have adopted these new standards, allowing users to share a common platform to
exchange knowledge at a global scale. High-tech start-ups and small public-private
partnerships have spread across the globe to become the service providers of the new digital
science learning network, empowering researchers, educators and students worldwide to
share knowledge by using the best available technology. Free and open, high quality and
crowdsource science, focusing on the grand challenges of our time, shape the daily life [of] a
new generation of researchers.’1
As far as the EU is concerned, an important element for getting close to such an ideal
situation for research and innovation is the concept of a European Research Area (ERA).
Proposed by the European Commission in 2000, an ERA would help to put to best use
scientific capacity and material resources in EU Member States and should lead to: 'A unified
research area open to the world based on the Internal Market, in which researchers, scientific
knowledge and technology circulate freely and through which the Union and its Member
States strengthen their scientific and technological bases, their competitiveness and their
capacity to collectively address grand challenges.' 2 In a more detailed manner, the
Commission describes an ERA as a place ‘where national and European policies can be
implemented more coherently, and where people and knowledge can circulate more freely;
an area attractive both to European researchers and to the best researchers from third
countries and built on respect for the common social and ethical values of Europeans and

1 European Commission, Open Science 2030, A Day in the Life of Scientist, AD 2030, 2015. Although

disclaiming that the document represents its official position, the European Commission published this
paper which is based on a brainstorm with and feedback from a number of scientists, as well as
representatives of publishing companies, funding agencies and research institutions.
2 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, A Reinforced European Research Area
Partnership for Excellence and Growth, COM(2012) 392 final, 17.7.2012, p. 3.

PE 581.382

5

Cost of Non-Europe Report

their diversity.’3 In fact, these objectives for research and innovation in the EU have also been
included in the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU (TFEU), which states that ‘The Union
shall have the objective of strengthening its scientific and technological bases by achieving a
European research area in which researchers, scientific knowledge and technology circulate
freely, and encouraging it to become more competitive, including its industry, while
promoting all the research activities deemed necessary by virtue of the Chapter of the
Treaties.’4 In other words, to ensure that new knowledge-intensive products and services are
developed and contribute substantially to growth and jobs in Europe, there is a need for
more coordinated research systems in Europe.
Going back to the Commission’s 2007 Green Paper, today the framework for setting up an
ERA is based on six priorities for implementing a European wide infrastructure for research.
These are:
(i) More effective national research systems;
(ii) Optimal transnational co-operation and competition;
(iii) An open labour market for researchers;
(iv) Gender equality and gender mainstreaming in research;
(v) Optimal circulation, access to and transfer of scientific knowledge;
(vi) International cooperation.5
In fact, these six ERA priorities should pave the way for achieving the objective of creating a
genuine single market for knowledge, research and innovation. According to a 2014
Commission Communication, research and innovation, in turn, should build a source of
renewed growth.6 Moreover, in the view of the Commission, the ERA’s internal market
dimension and its potential impact on investments in research and innovation contribute
particularly to the priority ’Union of jobs, growth and competitiveness’ outlined in the Strategic
Agenda for the Union in times of change, agreed by the EU Member States at the European
Council meeting of June 2014.7
According to a 2014 progress report by the European Commission, the ERA is already well
implemented.8 Looking, inter alia, at Member States reforms in all ERA priorities, the
compliance of research performing organisations (RPOs), and the support from the
Commission to national ERA policies, this report indicates that a total completion of 81 % of

3 Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and

Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Towards a European Research Area,
COM(2000) 6 final, 18.1.2000.
4 Consolidated Version (2012) of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union, article 179,
section 1.
5 See, e.g., Vincent Reillon, The European Research Area. Evolving concept, implementation challenges,
In-Depth Analysis, European Parliamentary Research Service, European Parliament, March 2016, pp. 29
- 32.
6 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Research and innovation as sources
of renewed growth, COM(2014) 339 final, 10.6.2014.
7 Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament, European
Research Area. Progress Report, COM(2014) 575 final, 15.9.2014.
8 European Commission, European Research Area. Facts and Figures 2014, 2014, p. 54.

PE 581.382

6

European Research Area

the ERA concept can be assumed up to 2014.9 Viewed from another angle, the Commission's
report implies that there is only a distance of 19 % to the target of a genuine single market for
knowledge, research and innovation that would generate economic growth. Furthermore, in
the light of these figures, the realisation of the scenario described above for the future of
research and innovation in Europe and the wider world within only 16 years (from 2014
onwards), does not seem unrealistic given that the EU's contribution in form of achieving the
ERA is allegedly well advanced.
This Cost of Non-Europe report, which challenges this understanding of the implementation
and completion of the ERA, is structured in four main sections. The first section will describe
from a historical perspective the political decisions which have led to today's concept of the
ERA with its six priorities. The section also highlights the legal bases for the implementation
of ERA and its development over time. In the second section, the latest developments
regarding the implementation will be outlined, including a short description of the differing
perceptions of ERA in some EU Member States. In the third section, remaining shortcomings
for the successful implementation of the ERA will be discussed. The fourth section will
address the economic dimension of ERA, including a look at potential costs due to
shortcomings in the set-up of the ERA policy framework. Finally, the report will outline
several options for future policy-making on ERA.

2. Historical Background
From the outset of European integration, research has been part of EU policy. However, its
legal basis was limited in its scope to the European Atomic Energy Community
(EURATOM), funded in 1957. The focus in EU research policy was thus put on the
establishment and functioning of the Joint Research Centre (JRC), for example on the JRC's
nuclear work in the framework of the EURATOM Research and Training Programme.
Therefore, the wider European research policy was developed outside the framework of the
then European Economic Community (EEC).10 An intergovernmental collaboration of
European countries called European Cooperation in the Field of Scientific and Technical
Research (COST), which was established in 1971 and still exists today under the EU
Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development (Framework
Programme), contributed to fostering research at the European level.11
Subsequently, however, EU heads of state repeatedly stressed the importance of developing a
common research policy within the Community framework in order to coordinate national
research policies and replacing intergovernmental structures at later stages. As a reaction to
this demand, inter alia, the European Committee for Research and Development (CREST)
was established in 1974 and transformed into the European Research Area Committee
(ERAC) in 2010. The ERAC consists of up to two representatives at an appropriate level of the
9 For more details regarding the approach on this quantification, see Laura de Haan, Paul Vroonhof,

Simon Broek, Research Paper on the Implementation of an Integrated Research Area, pp. 83 - 85.
10 See, Alvero de Elera, The European Research Area: On the Way Towards a European Scientific
Community?, in: European Law Journal, Vol. 12, No. 5, pp. 559-574, here p. 560f.
11 General Resolution adopted by the Conference of European Research Ministers, Brussels, 22 and 23
November 1971.

PE 581.382

7

Cost of Non-Europe Report

body responsible for research and innovation policies from each Member State, and the
European Commission.12 The Committee functions today as an advisory body for both the
Council and the Commission on the establishment of a common research policy.13
Nevertheless, only the introduction of the first Framework Programme of 1983 provided for
more coherence between the national research policies within the Community. Crucially,
there was no clear legal basis for a European approach under Community law for a research
and innovation policy. Thus, European policy in this field remained a combined approach of
the Council, the Commission and the Member States. The Council acknowledged the
continuing lack of a legal basis for a coordinated research policy, resorting to Article 235
Treaty Establishing the European Community as a basis for legal action.14
The European Single Act (ESA), which came into force in 1987, aimed to resolve the legal
shortfalls for developing a common European policy for research and innovation by
providing the EU with the competence to define an appropriate policy. In fact, the ESA
excluded harmonisation of this policy field and stressed the importance of coordination and
cooperation between Member States and the Community. The Treaties of Maastricht and
Amsterdam did not contribute any further to closing the legal lacuna for the development of
a real EU research and innovation policy. 15
In order to give new impetus to cooperation in the field of research, in 1999 the then EU
Commissioner for Research, Philippe Busquin, introduced the concept of a European
Research Area.16 Yet, the Commission's accompanying Communication did not entail a
concrete definition of ERA. However, in 2000, the European Council agreed to include the
concept of the ERA in the new Lisbon Strategy, which aimed at turning the EU into the most
competitive and dynamic knowledge based economy of the world. As regards the
implementation of the ERA, the European Council demanded the use of the Open Method of
Coordination (OMC) in order to ensure multilateral surveillance, building on the ERA
dimension of National Reform Programmes, mutual learning and peer review. 17 The
Community's sixth Framework Programme (FP) was to function as the main instrument for
implementing the ERA, but remained mainly a tool for supporting national research
policies.18
A strengthened legal basis for the implementation of the ERA was only introduced with the
Lisbon Treaty of 2009. Article 182 (5) TFEU provides for a legal procedure for the adoption
measures implementing the ERA. The competences of the EU in the areas of research,
Council of the European Union, Council conclusion on the ERAC Mandate, Brussels 1.12.2015,
14875/15.
13 Council resolution of 14 January 1974 on an initial programme of the European Communities in the
field of science and technology, in Official Journal of the European Communities, No C 7/6, 29.1.74.
14 Article 235 EC stipulated that: ’If action by the Community should prove necessary to attain, in the
course of the operation of the common market, one of the objectives of the Community and this Treaty
has not provided the necessary powers, the Council shall, acting unanimously on a proposal from the
Commission and after consulting the European Parliament, take the appropriate measures.’
15 See, de Elera, The European Research Area, p. 562.
16 See, e.g., Reillon, The European Research Area, In-Depth Analysis, p. 11f.
17 Council of the European Union, Council Conclusions on The Launch of the "Ljubljana Process"
towards full realisation of ERA (10231/08).
18 See, de Elera, The European Research Area, p. 563.
12

PE 581.382

8

European Research Area

technological development and space are included amongst the 'shared' competences
between the EU and the Member States. Crucially, Article 4.3 TFEU specifically states that
action by the Union in this field does not prevent the Member States from exercising their
competences in all these three areas by carrying out activities, in particular to define and
implement programmes. Article 180 TFEU, according to which the Union should
complement the activities carried out in the Member States by carrying out activities such as
implementation of research, technological development and demonstration programmes,
also reflects this principle. Finally, an impact assessment by the European Commission
considered the policy options for the completion of the ERA, including the following options
for legislative action:19
1) Business as usual;
2) Reinforced partnership for the ERA;
3) Sectoral legal measures for the ERA;
4) ERA Framework Directive.
It was concluded that policy option 2 would ensure substantial progress towards complete
compliance of the ERA aims in the form of the priorities leading to its completion. 20
Despite the strengthened legal basis enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty, the implementation of
the ERA remained a partnership approach based on the OMC. In fact, the ERA
implementation exercise developed into a partnership between the Commission, the Member
States and research stakeholders. Moreover, this partnership was institutionalised with the
establishment of two bodies to support the ERA implementation: 1) the previously
mentioned CREST, which later became the ERAC. The new mandate which transposed
CREST into ERAC is expected to better reflect the shared competence between the Member
States, the EU and research stakeholders 21; 2) the ERA Stakeholder Platform established in
2012. This offers key stakeholders a forum for discussion on the development of the ERA and
enables them to have a direct dialogue with the Commission.22
In 2011, the European Council assessed the implementation process of ERA. Based on its
assessment, the Council demanded that the ERA should be completed by 2014.23 The 2012
Commission communication on ERA reiterated this demand. Furthermore, this
communication introduced the five priorities outlined above (a sixth priority was added in
19 European Commission, Impact Assessment accompanying the Communication from the Commission

to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of Regions: A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth,
COM(2012) 392 final, 17.7.2012, pp. 21-29.
20 Ibid, p. 36.
21 CREST was renamed as European Research Area Committee (ERAC) by the Council Resolution of 26
May 2010, set out in Council of the European Union, Outcomes of Proceedings, Subject: Developments
in the governance of the European Research Area (ERA) - Council Conclusion, 28 May 2010, doc.
10255/10.
22 European Commission, Impact Assessment accompanying the Communication from the Commission
to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of Regions: A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth,
COM(2012) 392 final, 17.7.2012, pp. 21-23.
23 European Council Conclusions, 4 February 2011, Brussels, doc EUCO 2/11.

PE 581.382

9

Cost of Non-Europe Report

2015) which constitute the main framework of ERA and are aimed to give more guidance for
its implementation.24

3. State of Play
Today, the implementation of the ERA framework is still not complete. The latest (2014)
Commission's ERA progress report stated that there have been advances in the
implementation of the single ERA priorities.25 The report presented updated and new
measures used by RPOs and research funding organisations (RFOs) for the implementation
of the ERA at the national levels. However, no official statistical sources were available for
the performance of RPOs and RFOs. To compensate for this weakness of data, the
Commission launched a so-called ERA survey. As the responses were not sufficiently
representative, the survey's results, which were included in the progress report, only
provided an indication of the situation of ERA implementation among RPOs and RFOs. 26
Nevertheless, the progress report provides an overview of the progress made by Member
States in implementing the ERA priorities. Crucially, the report clearly demonstrates that the
EU Member States have different systems and paces for the implementation processes. Four
examples outline this: Austria aims to embed the ERA framework within all its research and
development (R&D) activities and has developed an EU action plan (which covers not only
the ERA framework, but also the latest FP, Horizon 2020, and other programmes). Although
the Czech Republic has established an ERA Committee, which functions as an advisory body
to the Ministry of Education and consists, inter alia, of representatives from universities and
research institutes, there is reluctance in the wider Czech research community towards the
ERA. For Finland, ERA provides an opportunity to look across borders and to learn from
other Member States how to deal with issues of research and innovation. In the case of
Portugal, budgetary constraints have negatively affected the involvement and commitment
needed to implement the ERA framework. The four examples also show that the
implementation of the ERA priorities in the Member States is sometimes directly driven by
funders and RPOs (bottom up) and in other cases by national/regional policies (top-down).27
Importantly, the progress report states that the completion of the ERA depends upon four
conditions:
1) Member State reforms in all ERA priorities;
2) Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the Communication by
research stakeholders;
3) Increased support from the Commission to national ERA policies;
4) Transparent ERA Monitoring System (EMM).

24 European Commission, Impact Assessment accompanying the Communication the Commission to

the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of Regions: A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth,
COM(2012) 392 final, 17.7.2012, p. 3.
25 European Commission, European Research Area, Progress Report 2014, Facts and Figures.
26 For further details on the Commission survey, see Laura de Haan, Paul Vroonhof, Simon Broek,
Research Paper on the Monitoring of the Integrated European Research Area, p. 105-107.
27 For more details on the perception of ERA and the ERA implementation process in the four countries,
see de Haan, Vroonhof, Broek, Research Paper on the Implementation of an Integrated Research Area,
p. 65.

PE 581.382

10

European Research Area

Based on various indicators and data gathering mechanisms, the EMM was developed with
the aim of assessing progress in the compliance of the ERA framework at three levels: Firstly,
at the policy level (national and regional policies); secondly, at the operational level (RFOs
and RPOs); and thirdly and finally, at the European level. The EMM brings together the
findings from all levels in order to provide a state of play of the implementation of ERA in
Europe. At the moment, however, the EMM is in a phase of transition. In fact, this transition
is closely connected to the ERA Roadmap 2015-2020 that was developed by the ERAC and
endorsed by the European Council in May 2015.28
The Roadmap's purpose is to identify a limited number of key implementation priorities
which are likely to have the biggest impact on Europe's science, research and innovations
systems, if all Member States of the ERA partnership get them right. Moreover, the Roadmap
has identified actions at the national and European level for the implementation of each of
the six ERA priorities. Crucially, it is clearly emphasised that there are differences between
national research systems, and thus in their capacity to implement the ERA framework.
Therefore, the ERA Roadmap provides an outline for developing national roadmaps and the
Member States are expected to produce their own national roadmaps by mid-2016.29 In other
words, with the roadmap approach, the Member States are in the lead to define action plans
according to national priorities.30 Furthermore, in the ERA Progress Report 2014, the
Commission emphasised the role of the ERA Roadmap and national action plans for the
implementation of ERA, adding that 'different options might be considered to foster the
development of ERA, including the legislative option if needed be, based on the new ERArelated provisions in the TFEU'.31
Already in 2013, a group of eight Members of the European Parliament called for 'A
Maastricht for Research', suggesting an ERA Framework Directive in order to lead all
Member States.32 In reaction to the ERA Roadmap, the League of the European Research
Universities (LERU) also suggested starting legislative action for the implementation of
ERA.33 So far, however, the main legal measures within the field of EU research policy
include research funding, the Scientific VISA Directive and a legal framework for the socalled European Research Infrastructure Consortia (EPIC).34 Against this background, the
following chapter will show both how the weak legislative base leads to obstacles for the
implementation of the ERA and how its general framework consisting of the six priorities
suffers from various shortcomings.

28 European Research Area and Innovation Committee, ERAC 1208/15, ERAC Opinion on the European

Research Area Roadmap 2015-2020, 20 April 2015.
29 Council of the European Union, conclusions on the European Research Area Roadmap 2015-2020,
19 May 2015.
30 See also Reillon, The European Research Area, In-Depth Analysis, p. 32.
31 Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament, European
Research Area, Progress Report 2014, COM(2014) 575 final, 15.9.2014, p. 10.
32 A Maastricht for Research, Amalia Sartori, Luigi Berlinguer, Christian Ehler, Maria Carvalho Da
Graça, Teresa Riera Madurell, Catherine Trautmann, Patrizia Toia, Antonia Fernando Correia de
Campos, Philippe Busquin, October 2013.
33 LERU, ERAC ERA Roadmap 2015-2020: Nothing New under the soon, Press release 16.04.2015.
34 See, e.g., Inga Ulnicane, Research Paper on the European Research Area Initiative and the Free
Circulation of Knowledge, p. 28.

PE 581.382

11

Cost of Non-Europe Report

4. Shortcomings in the ERA framework and obstacles for
implementation
The ERA priorities were first set in 2012. Based on the results of an ex-ante impact assessment
on the ERA35, the Commission's ERA public consultation36 and the written opinion of
ERAC37, five priorities were established for setting the ERA framework: (i) more effective
national research systems, (ii) optimal transnational co-operation and competition, (iii) an
open labour market for researchers, (iv) gender equality and gender mainstreaming in
research, and (iv) optimal circulation, access to and uptake of scientific knowledge. With the
adoption of the ERA Roadmap in 2015, the sixth priority was introduced: (vi) international
cooperation.38 All six priorities are closely linked with one another. As the study by Inga
Ulnicane rightly outlines, for example, open, transparent and merit-based recruitment (ERA
priority 3) and gender equality (ERA priority 4) are essential elements of effective research
systems (ERA priority 1).39 Therefore, shortcomings in the implementation of one of the
priorities can have effects on the implementation of one or more of the other priorities, and
vice versa.
As will be shown in the following sections, looking at three selected examples of the
priorities, there are various shortcomings in the ERA framework.
Example 1: First ERA priority on more effective national research systems
Priority 1 is directed towards national research funding. It aims at increasing competition
and sustaining or raising investment in research. In fact, an important characteristic of
national research systems is the amount of funding spent on research and development
(R&D). In 2002, the European Council adopted the Barcelona target, setting the aim that
every EU Member State should invest 3 % of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in R&D (one
third of funding from governments and two thirds from business). This target was intended
to increase the level of R&D funding in the EU compared to the levels in the United States
and Japan. While the European Commission and the European Council are emphasising the
importance of increasing R&D funding, only slight progress has been made in the EU
Member States from 1.81 % in 2002 to 2.01 % in 2013.

35 European Commission, Impact Assessment accompanying the Communication the Commission to

the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the
Committee of Regions: A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth,
SWD(2012) 212 final, 17.7.2012.
36 See, e.g., European Commission, Areas of untapped potential for the development of the European
Research Area. Analysis of the Response to the ERA framework public consultation, 2012.
37 European Research Area Committee, ERAC 1215/11, ERAC Opinion on the development of an ERA
Framework that has been approved by written procedure, 9.12.2011.
38 See, e.g., Council of the European Union, Council conclusion on the ERAC, Permanent
Representatives Committee, Draft Council conclusions on the European Research Area Roadmap 20152020, doc 8975/15, 29.5.2015, p. 4.
39 Ulnicane, Research Paper on the European Research Area Initiative and the Free Circulation of
Knowledge, p. 25.

PE 581.382

12

European Research Area

Another important characteristic of contemporary research systems is their project-based
funding. Along the same line, the share of project-based research funding is considered as an
effective allocation mechanism for the best project and serves as a basis for the operational
implementation. In other words, project-based funding has become one of the main drivers
to establish effective national research systems. Although project-based funding might be an
effective way to allocate research funding, the allocation can involve high costs for the RFOs
and RPOs involved. Moreover, such funding might increase job insecurity for researchers
given that many researchers work on fixed-term contracts bound to research projects with
limited timeframes.
Finally, there are major differences across EU Member States in terms of reforming their
national research and innovations systems, their research and innovation performance and
their R&D expenditures. There is a long-standing divide between Northern/Western
European countries and Southern/Eastern European countries; there are also noteworthy
differences amongst Central and Eastern European countries, some of which having
undertaken reforms according to the ERA framework, whilst others have not. A lack of
reform and progress in a number of Member States limits also the possibilities to participate
successfully in transnational cooperation (ERA priority 2) and in an open labour market for
researchers (ERA priority 3).
Example 2: ERA priority on optimal transnational cooperation and competition
Priority 2 aims at promoting effective transnational cooperation in the field of research and at
jointly addressing grand challenges such as demographic change, food security, clean and
efficient energy, green transport, climate change and secure societies. These grand challenges
should be faced by the alignment of national and international funding sources by defining
and implementing common priorities and joint research agendas building on initiatives such
as Joint Programming Initiatives (JPIs), for example. Since 2010, ten Joint Programming
Initiatives have been launched to pool national research efforts in order to tackle common
European grand challenges. According to the ERA Progress Report 2014, however, less than
1 % of national public R&D funding is spent on transnational research. 40
Furthermore, as a result of the specific focus on addressing grand challenges and establishing
and operating appropriate research infrastructures, it appears that insufficient attention has
been given to bottom-up scientific collaboration across national borders within the EU.
Bottom-up transnational collaborations are an increasingly important source of knowledge
production, high quality research and highly specialised expertise and also trigger high
impact outputs. The lack of funding has contributed in particular to hampering collaboration
of this sort, there being an overly strong focus on top-down transnational research
collaboration.

40 Science Europe has criticised this figure for not taking into account some key forms of coordinated

spending such as FP and intergovernmental agreements on research infrastructures such as the
European Organisation for Nuclear Research, usually known as CERN.

PE 581.382

13

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Example 3: ERA priority on an open labour market for researchers
Priority 3 aims to ensure the removal of barriers to researcher mobility (including
international mobility within and from outside the EU as well as cross-sectoral academiabusiness mobility), training and attractive careers. It is a broad priority, comprising a number
of targets and measures such as, for example, the removal of legal and other obstacles to
open, transparent and merit-based recruitment, cross-border access to and portability of
national grants, the so-called Retirements Savings Vehicle for European Research Institutions
(RESAVER) and the creation of an enabling framework for the implementation of the Human
Resource Strategy for Researchers incorporating the European Charter for Researchers and
the Code of Conduct for the Recruitment of Researchers (Charter and Code).
The principles - such as research freedom, stability and permanence of employment, gender
balance, career development and the value of mobility - of the Charter and the Code should
ensure that researcher are provided with the same rights and obligations, wherever they
work throughout the EU. However, even in some universities that have signed the Charter
and the Code, awareness and implementation of the principles are limited. Of the
approximately 1 500 organizations from 40 different countries supporting the Charter and the
Code, only 250 organizations have received the Commission’s ‘HR Excellence in Research’
for actually implementing the principles in their human resource policies. Moreover, there is
also a lack of open, transparent and merit-based recruitment. A vast majority of EU national
authorities consider their recruitment systems as largely open and transparent. In contrast,
many researcher perceive recruitment procedures as not open and transparent, and as
characterized by protectionism, nepotism and a lack of human resources strategy and
information.
Likewise, RESAVER, offering researchers the possibility to preserve their supplementary
pension benefits when they move between different countries, is restrained in its
implementation and function. To date, 280 public and private research institutions from only
nine EU Member States41 have joined RESAVER as the domestic legislation of several EU
Member States, amongst others Germany and France, prohibits their participation. In these
countries, national legislations do not allow public employers to join the European pension
arrangement.
Furthermore, there is a limited portability of and access to national research grants creating
barriers for the mobility of researchers from one EU Member State to another. This is
especially due to two barriers: (i) limited opportunities for the cross-border portability of
national research grants and (ii) the residence and institutional affiliation requirements,
which are among eligibility criteria for many national research grants. Thus, only a few
national funding agencies allow grant portability based on agreements as is the case for
Germany, Austria and Switzerland (D-A-CH agreement).
Finally, given the above mentioned existing differences between the research systems of the
Member States, researchers still face a series of practical problems regarding mobility, social

41 Austria, Denmark, Czech Republic, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Spain and the Netherlands.

PE 581.382

14

European Research Area

protection, gender equality and employment opportunities. As result, there is a one-way flow
of researchers to Northern Europe where researchers can benefit from career opportunities
and social security.42
Crucially, all demonstrated shortcomings of the ERA framework fit into a general obstacle to
the implementation of the ERA: The ERA framework lacks well-defined baselines and target
values. As a consequence, there are no clear objectives that form a base for measuring
implementation achievements.43 Without clear baselines and target values, however, the
EMM has developed with the aim of monitoring the progress in compliance of the ERA at
three levels - (i) policy level (national and regional policies), (ii) operational level (RFOs and
RPOs) and (iii) European level - lacks references for an objective monitoring. 44
Taking the example of the anticipated implementation of ERA priority 1: The EU Member
States are expected to specifically address two areas, namely to allocate funding through
open calls for proposals and to take the quality of RPOs and their outputs as a basis for
funding decisions.45 The assessment as to whether EU Member States fulfil these obligations
depends on what is most appropriate given the national research system. Thus, the EU
Member States’ governments and other stakeholders can, for example, make different - and
even opposing - choices regarding the assessment leading to different valuation of RPOs and
grounds for funding. In addition, the different approaches per Member States make it
difficult to compare the progress between Member States.
Moreover, this way of monitoring the implementation of ERA priority 1 does not include
comparable indicators on how EU Member States allocate project-based funding. In fact,
those indicators differ widely from one Member State to another. In addition, a more finetuned monitoring would need to take in to account whether appropriate infrastructures are
in place and whether appropriate cultures and mentalities in RPO and RFO are established.
As all these elements are missing in the monitoring, its outcome gives a widely incomplete
picture of the implementation progress.46
Due to the lack of precise, well-defined baseline and target values, the ERA framework and
its monitoring mechanisms are not giving objective guidance to the EU Member States, let
alone outlining a desired end result. The fact that the ERA is missing a clear legal base, and
that the driver for its implementation is the OMC, increases accordingly the obstacles for
All examples are taken from the research paper by Ulnicane, Research Paper on the European
Research Area Initiative and the Free Circulation of Knowledge, where further details on the
shortcomings of the ERA framework can be found.
43 See also Reillon, The European Research Area, In-Depth Analysis, The European Research Area, p.
36.
44 On further shortcomings of the EMM, see the research paper by Laura de Haan, Paul Vroonhof,
Simon Broek, Cost of Non-Europe in the European Research Area: Briefing Paper on the Monitoring
Mechanisms of the Integrated European Research Area, p. 117.
45 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document, Impact Assessment, Accompanying
the document, Communication the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions. A Reinforced European Research Area
Partnership for Excellence and Growth, 17.7.2012, COM(2012) 392 final, pp. 119-125.
46 See, e.g., de Haan, Vroonhof, Broek, Cost of Non-Europe in the European Research Area: Briefing
Paper on the Monitoring Mechanisms of the Integrated European Research Area, p. 117.
42

PE 581.382

15

Cost of Non-Europe Report

implementation. As various political scientists have argued, the use of the OMC for
implementing agreed policy goals among EU governments is often ineffective since EU
Member States do not honour commitments due to the absence of enforcement mechanisms
for steering implementation.47 As a result, the OMC enables EU Member States to take
different approaches to the implementation of the ERA framework. In other words, the risk
that the EU Member States would develop differing ERA policies and measures due to the
use of the OMC was not effectively addressed when setting up the ERA policy framework.
A solution for this defective ERA implementation could have been, for example, the
establishment of so-called SMART (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, Time-bound)
criteria for the ERA priorities accompanied by enforcement mechanisms, such as binding
instructions in the country specific recommendations or financial incentives to guide the
implementation. The lack of such criteria, however, has led to a heterogeneous
implementation and a scattered research and innovation policy landscape in the EU.
Although this uneven implementation was also recognized by the Competitiveness Council
of May 2015, the adoption of the ERA Roadmap did not address all shortcomings in the
implementation of the ERA policy as it was not combined with the introduction of clearly
defined objectives or criteria.

5. Quantifying the Cost of Non-Europe
The concept of the Cost of Non-Europe, which was introduced a quarter of a century ago by
the Italian economist Paolo Cecchini, estimated the economic cost of the absence of a
completed single European market.48 This concept of measuring the added value of
European cooperation in policy fields, became the corner stone of EPRS Cost of Non-Europe
studies. In order to quantify the added value of European coordination in a given policy area,
however, the desired end-situation resulting from the envisaged implementation of the
policy needs to be clearly defined.
The absence of well-defined baselines, objective criteria and end-goals is indeed a
fundamental obstacle for the estimation of the Cost of Non-Europe for the issue of ERA. As
demonstrated in the previous chapter, the six ERA priorities do not define concrete
measurable end-goals. Therefore, the potential effects of their implementation cannot be
reliably quantified.
In order to give an indication of the Cost of Non-Europe on the issue of the ERA, one could
build upon on the estimations of the European Commission. The basis for this indicative
measurement would be a distance-to-target quantification based on the Commission's ERA
impact assessment from 2012 and the ERA progress report of 2014. In the impact assessment,
the European Commission estimates the gain of a completed ERA at € 16 billion annually.49
47 See, e.g., Simon Hix and Bjørn Høyland, The Political System of the European Union, Basingstoke:

Palgrave, 2011, 3rd edition, pp. 201-202.
48 Commission of the European Communities, Europe 1992. The Overall Challenge, SEC(88) 524 final,
13.4.1998.
49 European Commission Staff Working Document, Impact Assessment, Accompanying the document,
Communication the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and

PE 581.382

16

European Research Area

The ERA progress report of 2014 states that 81 % of the RPO is in compliance with ERA. Due
to the absence of clearly defined end-goals in the ERA policy framework, however, these
figures should be considered as rough estimations at best. Yet, they do provide an overall
evaluation of the potential added value of the ERA. Using the Commission assumptions,
therefore, the distance-to-target quantification would result in a remaining ERA implementation
gap of 19 %. This amounts to € 3 billion annually.
Finally, based on these estimations, the costs resulting from a vague monitoring system could
be measured. More sound information on the ERA monitoring mechanism would certainly
also help the EU Member States to take more concrete actions to increase the implementation
of the ERA policy framework. In a scenario where effective monitoring would contribute to
reducing by half the 19 %distance-to-target, the remaining ERA implementation gap could be
considered to be € 1.5 billion.

6. Conclusion: Barriers to be removed
The 2000 ERA initiative was the first attempt to create a European area for research. Closely
linked to the Lisbon Strategy, the initiative aimed to turn the EU into the most competitive
and dynamic knowledge based economy. From the outset of the ERA policy, the EU Member
Stats made clear that binding legislation for harmonising research systems in the Union was
not welcomed. The EU Member States preferred to implement the ERA policy framework by
using the OMC. Nevertheless, completion of the ERA was not achieved. In 2012, the
European Commission adopted a communication with the purpose of improving the
guidance for implementation and of accelerating completion under the OMC. The adoption
of the ERA priorities at that time was one of the major renewals. However, the deadline for
completing the ERA in 2014/2015 was not met. In short, the six ERA priorities lacked clearly
defined baselines and end goals for enabling its successful implementation. As a
consequence, the EU Member States applied differing approaches when inserting the
priorities into their national research systems. This triggered a heterogeneous
implementation process of the ERA policy framework.
Against this background, this study concludes that the completion of an ERA within the next
years might be less realistic than indicated in some EU documents. 50 The study considers that
the ERA priorities function more as European standard-setters for research and research
systems. Taking also into account that research and research systems are constantly
developing social fields, the ERA should not be a static policy directed towards completion
with fixed deadlines. This report thus argues that ERA should better be perceived as an
open-ended process, facilitating research in Europe.
In fact, the European Commission and the Council of the EU have already acknowledged
that the ERA implementation process has developed in a heterogeneous manner over the

Social Committee and the Committee of Regions. A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for
Excellence and Growth, 17.7.2012, COM(2012) 392 final, pp. 29-30.
50 E.g., Council of the European Union, Draft Council conclusions on the European Research Area
Roadmap 2015-2020, Brussels, 19.5.2015, 8975/15.

PE 581.382

17

Cost of Non-Europe Report

years. Both reacted to this with the adoption of the ERA Roadmap and the introduction of the
national ERA roadmaps. This approach might work for most ERA priorities. However, to be
able to go beyond that approach, this study has identified two different legislative measures
and one technical measure, which could facilitate the implementation of the ERA policy
framework, namely, i) the adoption of a specific EU legislative measure on researcher
mobility; ii) the adoption of legislative measures by the EU and/or EU Member States to
allow the participation of all researchers in Europe in RESEAVER, and iii) the adoption of
technical measures for the ERA monitoring mechanism:
i.

In order to create an open European labour market for researchers, the barriers to
researcher mobility have to be removed. The current policy-framework provides no
effective instruments to remove those barriers and to ensure a level playing-field. To
remove these barriers, the EU needs to introduce specific legislation to ensure open
recruitment procedures, access to and portability of research grants and access to
research infrastructures.

ii.

Uncertainty on pension entitlements when moving abroad remains a barrier for
transnational mobility. The introduction of RESAVER by the European Commission
aims at providing researchers with more security regarding their pensions. The
instrument as such is fruitful. Nevertheless, the European Commission and the EU
Member States have to ensure that the legal framework of RESAVER is compatible
across all EU Member States in order to offer all researchers the same guaranties on
their pensions.

iii.

In order to steer effectively the implementation of the ERA policy framework, there
is a need for a more effective monitoring system. More specifically, five elements
would need to be established to improve the EMM: (i) a focus beyond quantitative
indicators on qualitative policy-related benchmarks, (ii) an ERA policy index
consisting of key development areas (associated with the ERA priorities), (iii) the
introduction of baseline and target values for specific monitoring indicators, (iv) a
self-assessment system for the EU Member States allowing them to identify strength
and weaknesses, and (v) Intensified efforts for country peer-reviewing and selfassessment as part of the Policy Support Facility, which is designed by the European
Commission to provide policy-makers in the EU with a broad range of services in
terms of formulation and implementation of research and innovation policies. 51
Finally, an improved monitoring system would increase possibilities for mutual
learning in designing, developing, evaluating and implementing the ERA.

51 See also de Haan, Vroonhof, Broek, Research Paper on the Monitoring Mechanisms of the Integrated

European Research Area, p. 120- 122.

PE 581.382

18

European Research Area

Annex I

Research Paper
on the European Research Area Initiative and Free
Circulation of Knowledge

by Dr. Inga Ulnicane

Abstract
This research paper analyses the European Research Area initiative launched in
2000 to facilitate the free circulation of researchers, scientific knowledge and
technology in the EU. In particular, the first three closely related ERA priorities
are studied: more effective national research systems, transnational cooperation,
and open labour market for researchers. The paper discusses the progress
achieved during the past 15 years and identifies a number of remaining gaps
and barriers, in particular for international mobility of researchers in the EU.

PE 581.382

19

Cost of Non-Europe Report

AUTHOR
This paper has been written by Dr. Inga Ulnicane of the University of Vienna, at the
request of the European Added Value Unit of the Directorate for Impact Assessment and
European Added Value, within the Directorate General for Parliamentary Research
Services (DG EPRS) of the General Secretariat of the European Parliament. It is part of a
Cost of Non-Europe report produced for the European Parliament’s Committee on
Industry, Energy and Research.
RESPONSIBLE ADMINISTRATORS
Christian Salm and Thomas Zandstra, European Added Value Unit
To contact the Unit, please e-mail EPRS-EuropeanAddedValueUnit@ep.europa.eu
LINGUISTIC VERSIONS
Original: EN

DISCLAIMER
The opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do
not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.
Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorized, provided the
source is acknowledged and the publisher is given prior notice and sent a copy.
Manuscript completed in November 2015
Brussels © European Union, 2016.

PE 581.382

20

European Research Area

Contents

Executive summary...................................................................................................................... 22
Chapter 1 European Research Area initiative .......................................................................... 22
I – Development of the European Research Area............................................................ 22
II – Framework of the Study ............................................................................................... 29
Chapter 2 More effective national research systems ............................................................... 30
Chapter 3 Transnational cooperation and competition .......................................................... 33
Chapter 4 Open labour market for researchers ........................................................................ 34
Chapter 5 Gaps and Barriers ....................................................................................................... 38
Chapter 6 Conclusions and Recommendations ....................................................................... 43
Bibliography .................................................................................................................................. 46
Annex 1: List of experts interviewed ......................................................................................... 50

PE 581.382

21

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Executive summary
The European Research Area (ERA) initiative, launched in 2000, aims to support the free
circulation of researchers, scientific knowledge and technology in the EU. The ERA is an
ambitious international initiative aiming to coordinate research which is one of the most
international activities with long traditions in global collaboration, mobility and
communication at the level of the scientific community. International research collaboration
and mobility leads to higher impact research and is increasingly needed to address crossborder societal challenges. As international research collaboration intensifies, pressure on
predominantly national research policies to adjust to internationalization increases.
The ERA initiative sets out an ambitious agenda for coordination of national research
policies through partnership involving EU institutions, member states and research
stakeholders. Realization of the ERA aims implies deep changes in established practices and
traditions of allocating research funding and recruiting researchers. For many countries and
institutions, it would mean not only changes in policies but also changes in academic
cultures and mind-sets. The ERA as a multi-level initiative is highly complex due to
subsidiarity of member states that decide on their national research policies and allocate a
majority of public research funding, autonomy of research funding organizations and
research performing organizations as well as academic freedom of researchers.
The paper analyses the progress achieved in the ERA initiative during the past 15 years and
identifies remaining gaps and barriers. In particular, it focuses on the first three closely
related ERA priorities: more effective national research systems, trans-national cooperation,
and open labour market for researchers. Gradually an increasing number of voluntary,
financial and legal instruments have been established to implement the ERA initiative.
However, uneven progress across countries and organizations towards the ERA aims
hampers free circulation of researchers and knowledge in the EU. Remaining gaps and
barriers for international research mobility include lack of open, transparent and merit-based
recruitment, portability of and access to research grants and dual career opportunities as well
as language barriers.
A number of measures can be considered to further advance the ERA aims. These include,
firstly, broadening of the ERA partnership of EU institutions, member states and researchers
stakeholders with other relevant actors from business community and grassroots
researchers’ organizations; secondly, better integrating the ERA initiative with related
policies such as innovation and education; and thirdly, exploring a mix of voluntary,
awareness and funding instruments as a potentially efficient way for promoting practices
and culture supportive of an open labour market for researchers.

Chapter 1 European Research Area initiative
I – Development of the European Research Area
The ERA initiative is an ambitious endeavour to coordinate research and innovation
internationally. While research practices have been international for centuries with
international collaboration and mobility playing an important role in knowledge production
and circulation (Crawford et al 1993), the ERA is an important attempt to internationalize
research policies and governance which is predominately national (Nedeva 2013). Thus,
research is a very specific area of European integration with a long tradition of international

PE 581.382

22

European Research Area

collaboration and with global peer-reviewed journals, scientific associations and conferences
setting quality standards today. The scientific community has been ahead of politics by selforganizing and self-governing its international activities. Today, international scientific
collaboration in a form of internationally co-authored scientific articles is increasing (Adams
2013; Wagner et al 2015) due to many reasons such as growing complexity of research, need
to address global questions and access to large scale research infrastructures. Intensifying
internationalization increases pressures on predominantly national research policies to
address needs for global collaboration in research.
Building on the earlier steps in the integration of European research policies (Chou and
Ulnicane 2015a), the ERA initiative sets out a broad programme in reforming national
research systems and facilitating transnational research cooperation and the circulation of
researchers and knowledge. It is a very ambitious policy programme due to its breadth and
complexity as it aims at deep changes in established norms, practices and traditions in
activities such as distributing research funding and recruiting and evaluating researchers.
The success of the ERA would require not only changes in policies but also changes in
academic cultures52 that, for a long time, have governed the allocation of research funding
and academic jobs in many countries, universities and research institutes. The diversity and
high number of actors involved contributes to the complexity of the ERA initiative. Research
policy is a shared competence between the EU and the member states. The member states
allocate the majority of funding and make major decisions about research policy. Moreover,
research funding organizations, universities and research institutes that have to implement
many policy decisions often have considerable autonomy that can be beneficial in facilitating
tailor-made reforms or in some cases it can be hindering change and allowing certain
resistance or even continuation of culture based on nepotism, academic ‘inbreeding’ or
cronyism. Furthermore, research is an area that is particularly challenging to govern due to
its unpredictability and creativity.
Countries, research funders, universities and research institutes involved in the ERA are very
diverse in terms of their organization and performance due to historical reasons and as a
result of their recent policies and strategies. Diversity in the organization of research can be a
great asset for ERA when different research and organizational profiles are complementary
and enrich each other by producing and utilizing a wide variety of knowledge. However,
differences in research and innovation performance, particularly when a considerable
number of countries and research organizations are lagging behind, can limit these countries’
and organizations’ abilities to participate in and benefit from the free circulation of
researchers, knowledge and technologies and thus make the full realization of the ERA
problematic.
Moreover, the ERA initiative has evolved during the times when research policies are
changing. These changes in many countries include shift from institutional funding to
increased share of project-based funding, from a stable and permanent academic
employment to growing use of fixed term contracts as well as trends towards more
internationalization and quantitative evaluation of research. Effects of these policy changes
on research have been contradictory. Increased efficiency, flexibility, transparency and
excellence are intended positive effects but science policy researchers have also indicated
shifts towards increasing short-termism, instability, less academic freedom and diversity of
research, and decreasing capabilities to address complex long-term problems (e.g., Stephan
2012; Whitley 2011). Major debates about appropriate methods to evaluate research are
52

On the need for fundamental cultural change in accomplishing the ERA, see also European
Commission 2013.

PE 581.382

23

Cost of Non-Europe Report

ongoing, as demonstrated by a recent publication of the Leiden Manifesto for research
metrics (Hicks et al 2015). These research policy changes, their diverse effects and ongoing
debates are highly relevant for the ERA priorities that cover topics such as efficiency of
science funding, peer-review, research careers, and mobility. While the ERA documents
mainly focus on the positive effects of changing research policies, broader analysis of diverse
effects of project-based funding, peer review and mobility would be highly relevant for the
ERA.53

Since the ERA initiative was launched in early 2000 by the Commission (European
Commission 2000) and approved by the Lisbon Council (Lisbon European Council
2000), it has gradually developed via Commission initiatives and Council decisions
(Ulnicane 2015a). The main steps in the development of the ERA initiative are set
out in the Box 1.

Development of the ERA initiative





















2000 ERA and Lisbon strategy launched
2002 Barcelona target of R&D funding of 3% of GDP
2002 Communication ‘The European Research Area: providing a new
momentum’
2005 Mid-term review and re-launch of the Lisbon strategy
2005 Researcher’s Charter and Code of Conduct for Recruitment
launched
2007 ERA Green paper – public consultation
2007 European Research Council established
2008 European Institute of Innovation and Technology established
2008 Ljubljana process on ERA governance as enhanced partnership
2009 Lisbon Treaty enters into force providing treaty basis for ERA
2009 Lund declaration on Grand Challenges
2010 Europe 2020 and Innovation Union initiatives launched
2012 ERA reform agenda and ERA Stakeholder Platform launched
2013 First ERA Progress Report
2014 Deadline for completing ERA
2014 RESAVER consortium launched
2015 ERA roadmap approved
2016 National ERA roadmaps to be developed

Box 1 Timeline of the ERA initiative with selected key developments (adapted
from Ulnicane 2015a)
The crucial steps in establishing the ERA initiative as it is known today were taken in 2012
when the Commission’s Communication on the reinforced ERA partnership (European

53

Such a broader analysis of diverse effects of research policy changes in the context of the ERA is
beyond the scope of this paper; that would need to be part of a longer term policy and analysis agenda.

PE 581.382

24

European Research Area

Commission 2012a) set out a reform agenda54. The document provided an extended ERA
definition as ‘a unified research area open to the world based on the Internal Market, in
which researchers, scientific knowledge and technology circulate freely and through which
the Union and its Member States strengthen their scientific and technological bases, their
competitiveness and their capacity to collectively address grand challenges’ (Ibid: 3). It also
established the five ERA priorities:
1. More effective national research systems
2. Optimal transnational cooperation and competition
Jointly addressing grand challenges
Effective investment in and use of research infrastructures
3. An open labour market for researchers
4. Gender equality and gender mainstreaming in research
5. Optimal circulation, access to and transfer of scientific knowledge
In recent documents, a sixth crosscutting priority has been added, namely, international
cooperation focusing on collaboration with countries outside the EU (ERAC 2015: 19-20;
European Commission 2014b: 18-19; 58)55. This priority is important because research
collaboration and mobility is not limited to the EU-28 and it is in the interests of the EU to
collaborate with other major and emerging research powers as well as with developing
countries (see also European Commission 2014a: 7). The six priorities are already broad but
there have also been proposals to focus on additional topics such as including humanities
and social sciences, promoting research integrity, and fostering science and society
interactions (LERU 2014).
The six ERA priorities are closely related and interlinked: transnational cooperation (Priority
2) will be more successful among effective national research systems (Priority 1) and vice
versa – national research systems can become more effective via transnational cooperation;
open, transparent and merit-based recruitment (Priority 3) and gender equality (Priority 4)
are essential elements of effective research systems (Priority 1). Large differences in the
performance between highly effective and lagging national research systems (Priority 1) can
hinder mutually beneficial transnational cooperation (Priority 2) and lead to asymmetric
researcher mobility flows (Priority 3) resulting in ‘brain-drain’ and ‘brain gain’ rather than a
‘win-win’ situation of ‘brain circulation’. For an overview of the ERA priorities and
corresponding actions for the first three priorities analysed in this paper, see Diagram 1.
The six priorities guide the ERA roadmap that was recently developed by the European
Research and Innovation Area Committee ERAC (ERAC 2015) and adopted by the Council
(Council of the European Union 2015). The ERA roadmap provides an outline for developing
national ERA roadmaps until 2016. In 2014, Germany was the first member state to adopt its
national ERA roadmap doing so even before the EU level roadmap was developed (Federal
Government 2014). The development of national ERA roadmaps could be an opportunity to
have one national ERA document that consolidates multiple national documents on different
ERA priorities that have been previously requested and monitored by different EU policy
documents (e.g. European Commission 2010b; European Commission 2014b) such as
national strategies for research and innovation (ERA priority 1), national roadmaps for
developments of research infrastructures (ERA priority 2b) and national strategies for
training researchers (ERA priority 3).

54

This document builds on the ERA aims, dimensions and activities set out in the previous ERA
documents (Ulnicane 2015a).

PE 581.382

25

Cost of Non-Europe Report

ERA
priorities

Priority 1
Effective
National
Research
Systems

Priority 2
Transnational
Cooperation

Priority 3
An Open
Labour Market
for
Researchers

Priority 4
Gender
Equality

European
Semester

Jointly
Addressing
Grand
Challenges
JPIs

The Charter
and the Code,
HRS4R

Policy Support
Facility

Research
Infrastructures
(ESFRI and
ERIC)

EURAXESS
services and
Jobs portal

Priority 5
Optimal
Circulation

Priority 6
International
Cooperation

Innovative
Doctoral
Training
principles

Scientific Visa

RESAVER
scheme for
portability of
supplementary
pensions

Diagram 1 ERA priorities and corresponding actions
Additionally, the ERA priorities form the basis of the ERA monitoring process started in 2013
in the annual ERA Progress Reports. Indicators of the ERA monitoring mechanism play an
important role in the ERA initiative. As the six priorities are rather broad, the ERA indicators

PE 581.382

26

European Research Area

operationalize and narrow them down. Recently, important changes and new developments
have been taking place regarding the ERA monitoring mechanism and indicators. The
European Commission has developed new indicators for the next ERA Progress Report in
2016 and the ERAC has developed indicators for monitoring the implementation of the ERA
roadmap.56 The ERA Progress Report 2014 (European Commission 2014a) concludes that the
conditions for the completion of the ERA are now in place, although the completion of ERA
remains a gradual process. The document states that ‘more efforts are needed to make ERA
fully operational and [...] it is now up to Member States and research stakeholders to
implement necessary ERA reforms and make ERA work’ (Ibid: 11).
Since the Ljubljana process in 2008, the ERA initiative has been developed as a partnership
between the Commission, the member states and stakeholder organizations. The partnership
approach, which is used also for other EU policy initiatives such as the Europe 2020 strategy,
was further strengthened by the 2012 ERA Communication on reinforced ERA partnership.
Following the 2012 ERA Communication, the ERA stakeholder platform was established.
Since then the Commission regularly signs partnership agreements with five to six main
research stakeholder organizations with a goal of working together towards the achievement
of the ERA. While research stakeholders have traditionally been actively involved in the
development of the EU Framework Programmes, the ERA stakeholder platform is an
important initiative involving stakeholder organizations in broader ERA policy issues.
Interviews undertaken within this study confirm that the partnership is appreciated by both
the policymakers and stakeholder organizations57 as a way to include stakeholders’ views in
the ERA policies and raise awareness about the ERA (see also European Commission 2014a).
The legal basis for the ERA was provided in the Lisbon Treaty that came into force in 2009.
Article 179 of the treaty states ‘The Union shall have the objective of strengthening its
scientific bases by achieving a European research area in which researchers, scientific
knowledge and technology circulate freely’. Article 182 (5) allows for the adoption of legal
measures necessary for the implementation of the ERA. According to this clause, as a
complement to the Framework Programme, ‘the European Parliament and the Council,
acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and after consulting the
Economic and Social Committee, shall establish the measures necessary for the
implementation of the European research area’58. The introduction of the legal basis for the
legislation on the ERA is an important development in a long-standing debate about the
possibility and feasibility of legal instruments in the ERA initiative.
The legal option was considered in 2012, when, in the impact assessment (European
Commission 2012b) accompanying the 2012 ERA Communication, four options for
completing the ERA by 2014 were analysed. The four options analysed were 1) Business as
usual, 2) Reinforced partnership for the ERA, 3) Sectoral legal measures for the ERA, and 4)
an ERA Framework Directive. It was concluded that ‘Policy option 2 (Reinforced partnership
for ERA) alone ensures a substantial level of progress towards compliance with the 2014
deadline imposed by the Council’ (European Commission 2012b: 36), while the preparation,
adoption and implementation of legislation would take a longer time.

56

These new developments were mentioned in the interviews undertaken during this study. Requests
were made for the documents but they were not received during the time of writing because the
documents were still being finalized.
57
One the previous members of the ERA stakeholder partnership – Nordic research cooperation
organization NordForsk (signed partnerships in 2012 and 2013) did not join the most recent
partnership in 2015. NordForsk declined interview request for this study.
58
On interpretation problems of this norm, see Pilniok (2014: 12-13).

PE 581.382

27

Cost of Non-Europe Report

More recently a number of politicians and stakeholders have repeated the calls for ERA
legislation. In 2013, two members of the European Parliament issued a call for ‘A Maastricht
for Research’ suggesting the ERA Framework Directive (Sartori and Berlinguer 2013). A
legislative approach to the ERA has also been suggested by the League of the European
Research Universities LERU (LERU 2015). However, the Council, which would have to play
a crucial role in adopting any legislation, has emphasised that ‘the use of legislation at the
European level to address obstacles to the ERA is currently not widely supported by the
Member States and should occur only where a clear and significant need is agreed, i.e. only
as a last resort’ (Council of the European Union 2014). In the ERA Progress Report 2014, the
Commission emphasised the role of the ERA Roadmap and national ERA action plans for the
implementation of the ERA, adding that ‘different options might be considered to foster the
development of ERA, including the legislative options if need be, based on the new ERArelated provisions in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union’ (European
Commission 2014a: 10). A recent policy brief (Andrée 2015) suggests that at this stage no
proposal for legislation for the implementation of the ERA should be recommended but that
the potential for using legislation should be kept. So far, the main legal measures in the EU
research policy include legislation for research funding, Scientific Visa Directive and a legal
framework for European Research Infrastructure Consortia (ERIC) (Pilniok 2014). The pros
and cons of addressing the remaining ERA gaps and barriers through legislative action will
be discussed in the final chapter 6.
The main policy instrument used by the Commission and the ERAC for the implementation
of the ERA is the open method of coordination (OMC). The OMC in the field of research and
innovation policy was introduced in 2000 by the Lisbon European Council to facilitate
mutual learning and flexible implementation of common targets in national policies.
Additionally, over the past 15 years, a number of specific EU level initiatives have been
launched, including the European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for the
Recruitment of Researchers, EURAXESS information and support service for mobile
researchers, the ERA monitoring mechanism and the RESAVER scheme for the portability of
supplementary pensions. The implementation of the ERA has directly and indirectly been
supported by EU level funding from the Framework Programmes and the Horizon 2020
program.
Since the launch of the Framework Programme in 1984, the funding allocated to it has
gradually increased. Even in times of crisis when the overall EU budget for 2014-2020 was
cut, the funding for Horizon 2020 was increased by 30% compared to the 7 th Framework
Programme (European Commission 2014d). 77 billion Euros initially allocated to the Horizon
2020 amounts to approximately 8% of the total EU budget of 960 billion euros, dominated by
the European Structural and Investment Funds59 and Common Agricultural Policy.
According to some analysts, a paradigm shift in EU prioritization towards research and
innovation would require a more radical re-allocation of funds towards growth policies such
as research and innovation (Kaiser and Prange-Gstöhl 2010). However, since the adoption of
the Horizon 2020 budget, 2.2 billion euros have already been moved to the new European
Fund for Strategic Investments. Additionally, there have been difficulties in securing
planned funding for Horizon 2020 during negotiations about annual EU budgets for 2015
and 2016 and the EU research and innovation programmes have experienced an
accumulating lack of payment appropriations.

59

83 billion euros from the European Structural and Investment Funds 2014-2020 are expected to be
allocated to research, innovation, and small and medium sized enterprises (European Commission
2014d).

PE 581.382

28

European Research Area

II – Framework of the Study
By taking stock of the ERA initiative as it has developed over the past 15 years, this study
identifies remaining gaps in and barriers to the realization of the European Research Area
and develops recommendations for addressing them.
The study is structured around five questions defined by the European Parliament Research
Service (NP1 – EPRS/EAVA/SER/15/211N). These questions are linked to the first three
priorities of the ERA initiative (more information on the ERA priorities in previous section)
with a particular focus on the third priority, namely, an open labour market for researchers:
General question: What are the gaps and barriers in the ERA initiative as established by the
Commission?
Question on ERA priority 1 (The establishment of more effective national research systems):
How does the ERA facilitate the establishment of more effective national research systems
supporting reforms at the national level and increasing the attractiveness and
complementarities of national research systems?
Question on ERA priority 2 (The realization of optimal transnational cooperation and
competition): To what extent can the ERA initiative as established by the Commission lead to
a better or optimal use of funds at EU level and improved cooperation between Member
States on issues of common interest and importance (climate change, health, energy)?
Question I on ERA priority 3 (Establishing an open labour market for researchers): What is
the current state of the internal labour market for researchers? Which are the current
possibilities for the mobility and social protection of researchers, gender equality and raising
employment rates in research (especially among youth)? Are there large geographical
differences throughout Europe?
Question II on ERA priority 3 (Establishing an open labour market for researchers) What
benefits can be expected, from the Member States’ perspective, from the implementation of
the ERA infrastructure in various specific initiatives such as mobility and social protection
for researchers (RESAVER), gender equality measures, and raising employment rates in
research (especially among youth)?
The study is structured according to these five questions. The first part of Chapter 1 outlined
the development of the European Research Area to address the first question. Chapter 2
focuses on more effective national research systems to address the second question. Chapter
3 analyses transnational cooperation and competition tackled in the third question. Chapter 4
explores the open labour market for researchers to study the fourth and the fifth questions.
Each chapter establishes the state of the art for the relevant ERA priority by analysing first of
all the key recent ERA policy documents: the ERA 2012 communication (European
Commission 2012a), the 2014 ERA Progress Report that outlines indicators used and results
achieved (European Commission 2014a, 2014b), and the ERA roadmap (ERAC 2015). A wide
range of other sources of information is also used. Chapter 5 presents gaps and barriers in
the ERA initiative identified in this study. Conclusions and Recommendations derived from
the analysis are presented in Chapter 6; the final chapter also addresses the question asked
by the European Parliamentary Research Service about possibilities to address the gaps and
barriers through legislative action or other forms of strengthened cooperation between
Member States.

PE 581.382

29

Cost of Non-Europe Report

This study was prepared July-October 2015. The analysis draws on multiple data sources and
research methods including expert interviews and analysis of policy documents, statistics
and academic literature. While there are numerous policy documents, reports, studies and
extensive academic literature on different aspects of the ERA, taking into account limited
time and scope of this study, the main focus here is on key recent documents and studies.
Additionally, 16 semi-structured expert interviews were undertaken with decision makers
and stakeholders from August-October 2015. To obtain diverse expertise and perspectives on
the ERA, interviewees were asked about their specific responsibilities and experiences
regarding the ERA priorities analysed. Interviews were undertaken via phone and Skype.
They lasted approximately 30 minutes - 1 hour, and were digitally recorded. In addition, the
study draws on approximately 100 interviews with researchers, policy-makers and
stakeholders across Europe undertaken within previous research projects of the author.

Chapter 2 More effective national research systems
This chapter addresses the second question of this study: How the ERA facilitates the
establishment of more effective national research systems supporting reforms at the national
level and increasing the attractiveness and competitiveness of national research systems. This
question is based on the ERA priority 1 – the establishment of more effective national
research systems.
As established in the 2012 ERA communication, the first priority on more effective national
research systems focuses on national research funding emphasizing increased competition
and sustained or greater investment in research. To derive maximum value from public
investments in research, the document outlines two approaches to research funding and
evaluation: first, allocating funding through open calls for proposals which are evaluated by
panels of leading domestic and non-domestic experts, and, second, assessing the quality of
research-performing organizations and teams and their outputs as a basis for institutional
funding decisions. The document claims that these approaches will motivate researchers to
reach internationally-competitive levels of performance and will lead to organizational
change.
In the ERA Progress Report 2014 (European Commission 2014a, 2014b), the four indicators
used to monitor the progress towards this priority are 1) the share of national GBAORD
(government budget appropriations or outlays on research and development) allocated as
project-based funding, 2) the share of funders’ budget allocated as project-based funding, 3)
the share of project-based research and development budget allocated through peer-review,
and 4) the share of institutional funding allocated based on institutional assessment and/or
evaluation.
In the ERA roadmap, the top action priority for effective national research systems is
‘strengthening the evaluation of research and innovation policies and seeking
complementarities between, and rationalization of, instruments at EU and national levels’.
To do so, the document envisages the use of national, EU (European Semester and Policy
Support Facility) and OECD (Innovation Policy Platform) policy intelligence tools, some of
which (e.g., European Semester) have already been in use for several years.
Data on research and innovation performance (European Commission 2015; OECD 2014)
suggests that today there are major differences among the member states in the effectiveness
of their national research systems. While some of the national research systems in the EU are
among the world leaders on many research and innovation indicators, others considerably
lag behind. The EU has used a variety of tools to facilitate reforms at the national level.

PE 581.382

30

European Research Area

Mutual learning exercises have taken place at the ERAC. The member states have previously
been requested to report on their progress in reforming their national research and
innovation systems within the framework of the Lisbon agenda and are requested to do so
today within the European Semester of the Europe 2020 Strategy.
Within the framework of the European Semester, the country specific recommendations
prepared by the European Commission include suggestions on research funding and
organization. The implementation of the country specific recommendations has been made
an ex-ante condition for receiving the EU Structural Funds 2014-2020 (European Union 2013).
While some national officials have found the pressure to implement country specific
recommendations useful for promoting long needed changes 60, some experts have criticised
the recommendations as being rather ad hoc and lacking systematic evidence (Veugelers
2014). The ERAC review of reporting on research and innovation reforms within the
European Semester found that effective dissemination and use of information from national
reports is difficult due to differences in substance, level of detail, and structure (ERAC 2014).
The ERAC also pointed out that reporting burden on national governments is increasing and
suggested streamlining various research and innovation reporting exercises (e.g., for the EU
and OECD).
In 2015, the Commission launched a new Policy Support Facility funded by Horizon 2020 to
provide additional help for member states to reform their research and innovation policies.
This new instrument, which has initially been utilized by Bulgaria, envisages a panel of
senior experts and officials from other governments that conducts a peer review of national
research and innovation policy and makes recommendations for improvements to public
funding for research, research careers, and knowledge transfer between academia and
business. Additionally, Spreading Excellence and Widening Participation activities funded
by Horizon 2020 support a number of other activities such as Teaming, Twinning and ERA
Chairs in low-performing member states61. Catching-up regions also use the European
Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) and related smart specialisation strategies outlining
their priority sectors for ESIF investments to build up their research and innovation
capacities.
While the EU research and innovation funding is meant to complement member state own
public investment in research and innovation, from 2007-2013 in some new member states
the EU Structural Funds for research and innovation were of the same magnitude as national
public research and innovation budget (Veugelers 2014: 6, 13). Additionally, in several new
member states with low national public R&D funding the Framework Programme 7 from
2008-12 contributed approximately 15-25% of national public research and innovation
funding, while the share of the FP 7 in a number of old member state was from around 5-10%
(Ibid:13). The experts have pointed out the increasing role of EU funding both in terms of
scale as they expect that in the coming years well over 20% of public funding for scientific
research will come from Brussels as well as in terms of content implying internationalisation
of scientific research and increasing role of scientific collaboration across borders (European
Commission 2013: 11). Moreover, EU funding also plays an important influence on
prioritization of certain research topics and choice of evaluation standards at the national
level.
60

An interview with a national official 4.1.2015. (undertaken within a previous research project)
According to a number of research performance indicators, 15 member states have been identified as
low-performing countries: 13 most recent member states that joined in 2004 and afterwards, Portugal,
and Luxembourg. Based on an interview with Dimitri Corpakis, Head of Unit B5 Spreading
excellence and widening participation, DG Research and Innovation, European Commission
08.09.2015.
61

PE 581.382

31

Cost of Non-Europe Report

An important characteristic of national research systems is the amount of funding spent on
research and development (R&D). The majority of R&D funding is allocated at the national
level from public and private funding sources. In 2002, within the context of Lisbon agenda,
the European Council set the so-called ‘Barcelona target’ of investing 3% of GDP in R&D,
with one third of this funding coming from the government and two thirds from business
(Barcelona European Council 2002). At that time, the aim was to increase the level of the
R&D funding in Europe towards that of the United States and Japan. In 2010, the ‘3% target’
was taken from the Lisbon strategy into the new Europe 2020 strategy, stating that it ‘has
succeeded in focusing attention on the need for both public and private sectors to invest in
R&D’ (European Commission 2010a: 8). While recognising the importance of increasing R&D
funding, the Council has also emphasised the significance of quality, efficiency and
composition of funding (Council of European Union 2014). Since the initial announcement of
the ‘3% target’ in 2002, only slight progress has been made in the EU-28 from 1.81% in 2002
to 2.01% in 201362. However, there is considerable diversity among member states, with the
Nordic countries Finland, Sweden and Denmark already investing more than 3% of their
GDP in R&D in 2013, while in some member states R&D expenditures are below 1% of GDP.
Within the Europe 2020 strategy, the member states have set their own national R&D
expenditure targets for 2020, ranging from 4% in Finland and Sweden to above 1% in
catching-up countries (See Graph 1).

Graph 1 Gross domestic expenditure on R&D 2013 (green) and target for 2020 (blue), % of
GDP (Source: Eurostat)
Veugelers (2014) found that during the recent economic crisis, the gap in public expenditure
for R&D in Europe has increased ‘with the innovation-lagging and fiscally weak countries
cutting public R&I budgets, while the innovation-leading and fiscally stronger countries
forge ahead with public R&I spending’ (Veugelers 2014: 8). Although the divide between
innovation-leading and innovation-lagging countries is largely split between the
North/West and South/East of Europe respectively, there are some exceptions - several new
member states such as Slovenia, Estonia and Czech Republic have considerably increased
their R&D expenditures to levels similar to old member states.
Nevertheless, a recent review of the Europe 2020 strategy suggests that ‘with a level of 2.06%
in 2012, and limited progress over time, the 3% target for 2020 is unlikely to be met.
Investment in R&D is forecast to increase to 2.2% by 2020. If member states meet their
62

Here and afterwards Eurostat data. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat Last accessed on 19
October 2015.

PE 581.382

32

European Research Area

national targets, this share could amount to 2.6%’ (European Commission 2014c). Although
the 3% target is not mentioned in the ERA roadmap (ERAC 2015), the Commissioner
(Moedas 2014) and some stakeholders (LERU 2014) have reaffirmed its importance. While
the initial rationale for the ‘3%target’ was for Europe to catch up with the US and Japan,
recent data demonstrate that the EU’s level of R&D expenditure is still lagging behind that of
the US, Japan and Korea and has recently been overtaken by China (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Total expenditure on R&D 1995-2013, % of GDP (Source: OECD 2015)
Establishment of more effective research systems is an important element for fully realizing
benefits of the ERA and open circulation of researchers, knowledge and technologies. It is a
long-term process that involves not only adequate and efficient funding but is also closely
related to other priorities enabling more productive participation in transnational
cooperation and mobility of researchers.

Chapter 3 Transnational cooperation and competition
This chapter explores the third question of the study – To what extent can the ERA initiative,
as established by the European Commission, lead to a better or optimal use of funds at EU
level and improved cooperation between Member States on issues of common interest and
importance (climate change, health, energy)? It relates to the ERA priority 2, namely, the
realization of optimal transnational cooperation and competition. In particular, it looks on
the first part of this priority - jointly addressing grand challenges63: the alignment of national
and international funding sources by defining and implementing common priorities and
joint research agendas building on initiatives such as Joint Programming Initiatives, ERANET calls and Public-Private Partnerships.
The ERA Progress Report 2014 lists a number of indicators for monitoring this aim, focusing
on the share of national funding allocated for transnationally coordinated research, joint
research agendas and projects that are peer-reviewed by non-national institutions. The main
action priority set out in the ERA roadmap for this aim is improving alignment within and
across the Joint Programming Process and the resulting Joint Programming Initiatives (JPIs)
and speeding up their implementation.
63

The second part of the Priority 2, i.e. effective investment in and use of research infrastructures is
beyond the scope of the question addressed in this chapter.

PE 581.382

33

Cost of Non-Europe Report

The ERA Progress Report 2014 lists several common funding schemes of national funding
agencies and Horizon 2020 such as ERA-NETs, Article 185 initiatives and Joint Programming
Initiatives (European Commission 2014b: 16)64. Since 2010, ten Joint Programming Initiatives
(JPIs) have been established to pool national research efforts to tackle common European
challenges in areas such as water challenges, neurodegenerative diseases, and demographic
changes. In total, their joint activities up to the end of 2013 amounted to more than 20 joint
calls and joint actions for a total of more than 200 million euros (Ibid).
There are contradictory views on how much of national research funding has been
coordinated so far. According to the ERA Progress Report 2014, less than 1% of national
public R&D funding is spent on transnational research. This figure has been criticised by
Science Europe (2015: 5) for not taking into account some key forms of coordinated spending
such as Framework Programmes and intergovernmental agreements on research
infrastructures like CERN. Science Europe (Ibid: 9) has also invited to discuss the alignment
between JPIs and other initiatives aimed at similar challenges, but from different perspective,
such as European Innovation Partnerships, Knowledge and Innovation Communities of the
European Institute of Innovation and Technology, ERA-NETs and the Horizon 2020 Societal
Challenges pillar. Relevant stakeholders from research and business communities have
indicated their interest to be involved in discussions about JPIs.
Moreover, Science Europe (2014b) has suggested additional models for collaboration among
national funding agencies, which have already been implemented by some of the Science
Europe member organizations. The three suggested models are: first, ‘Money follows
Researcher’ allowing researchers to take with them the remainder of a grant to another
country; second, ‘Money follows Cooperation Line’ allowing part of a grant to be used to
fund participation of a researcher from another country; and third, ‘The Lead Agency
Procedure’ enabling bilateral or multilateral research cooperation through evaluation by a
single Lead Agency.
Coordination of national research funding is a process that is gradually expanding.
Important future steps in this process is evaluation of results of existing joint programmes
and comparison of different models of funding coordination that could provide evidence for
revising existing programmes and designing new ones.

Chapter 4 Open labour market for researchers
This chapter analyses the fourth and the fifth questions of the study: What is the current state
of the internal labour market for researchers? What are the current possibilities for the
mobility and social protection of researchers, gender equality and raising employment rates
in research (especially among youth)? Are there large geographical differences throughout
Europe? What benefits can be expected from the implementation of the ERA infrastructure
from the Member States’ perspective on various specific initiatives such as the mobility and
social protection of researchers (RESAVER), gender equality measures, and raising
employment rates in research (especially among youth)? These questions address the third
ERA priority of an open labour market for researchers, aiming to ensure the removal of
barriers to researcher mobility, training and attractive careers.

64

More information on the coordination of national research programmes available here
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/joint-programming_en.htm Last accessed 26 October 2015.

PE 581.382

34

European Research Area

The open labour market for researchers is a broad priority that includes the international
mobility of researchers within the EU and from outside the EU as well as cross-sectoral
academia-business mobility. The 2012 ERA Communication lists a number of aims addressed
and measures undertaken during the last ten years to establish an open labour market for
researchers. These include the removal of legal and other obstacles to open, transparent and
merit-based recruitment, cross-border access to and portability of national grants, the
provision of information to researchers through the EURAXESS network and portal, support
for setting up and running structured innovative doctoral training, and the creation of an
enabling framework for the implementation of the Human Resource Strategy for Researchers
incorporating the European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for the
Recruitment of Researchers (‘the Charter and the Code’). Furthermore, initiatives to address
the social security barriers for internationally mobile researchers and to further facilitate the
entry and stay of third country national researchers are undertaken.
The ERA Progress Report 2014 outlines eleven indicators to monitor the implementation of
this priority. These include the share of organizations that advertise researcher vacancies
openly (including in the Commission’s EURAXESS portal), the share of organizations
implementing the Code and Charter principles, the share of funders supporting the uptake
of Code and Charter principles, and the share of funders whose grants are accessible to
foreign organizations and researchers and are portable abroad. Additional indicators focus
on research performing organizations that expose PhD students to industry and other
relevant employment sectors, the share of funders supporting the implementation of
structured doctoral training, and the share of research performing organizations supporting
researchers’ mobility outside academia.
The top action priority for an open labour market for researchers set out in the ERA roadmap
is ‘using open, transparent and merit-based recruitment practices with regard to research
positions’. In 2015, the Commission, together with the member states and stakeholders,
developed guidance on open, transparent and merit-based recruitment of researchers
including a checklist and toolkit for advertising positions as well as for the selection,
evaluation and appointment of researchers.65
Efforts to improve the recruitment of and working conditions for researchers are also at the
centre of the Commission’s Human Resources Strategy for Researchers (HRS4R), which is a
voluntary tool for supporting research institutions and funding organizations in the
implementation of the Charter and the Code66. Principles of the Charter and the Code, such
as research freedom, stability and permanence of employment, gender balance, career
development and the value of mobility, should make research institutions and national
research systems more attractive for researchers. However, during interviews several
stakeholder representatives pointed out that even at some universities that have signed the
Charter and the Code awareness and implementation of the principles is limited. While an
increasing number of over 1500 organizations from 40 countries have expressed explicit
support for the Code and Charter, only 250 have received the ‘HR Excellence in Research’
award for making progress in implementing the Code and Charter principles in their human
resource policies67. A significant portion of these awards has gone to the UK, while a number
of other member states are underrepresented or absent from the HRS4R (European
65

Available at http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/index.cfm/rights/singleNews/1851 Last accessed 26
October 2015.
66
More information available at http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/index.cfm/rights/index Last accessed 26
October 2015.
67
Communication with Dr. Irmela Brach, Senior Policy Officer, European Commission 20 October
2015.

PE 581.382

35

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Commission 2014b: 24). To strengthen the implementation of the Code, the Horizon 2020
Model Grant Agreement (Article 32) obliges beneficiaries to take all necessary measures to
implement the Code (Ibid: 23). This new policy within Horizon 2020 is designed to end
sexism, nepotism, localism, and cronyism in academic recruitment; grant winners failing to
comply might face penalties (Grove 2015).
The Commission’s EURAXESS service provides information for mobile researchers online
and in more than 200 service centres in 40 European countries, which have assisted with
more than 900 000 queries in the past six years on topics such as funding opportunities, visas,
accommodation and social security (European Commission 2014b: 26). The number of
research vacancies posted on the EURAXESS Jobs Portal has grown from 7500 in 2010 to over
40 000 in 2013 (Ibid: 23). Some countries have made it mandatory for publically-funded
institutions to advertise their positions on EURAXESS (e.g. Poland, Croatia, Italy) or
internationally (e.g. Austria) (Ibid).
To prepare the next generation of researchers for cross-border and cross-sectoral mobility,
seven Principles for Innovative Doctoral Training are being promoted: research excellence,
an attractive institutional environment, interdisciplinary research options, exposure to
industry and other relevant employment sectors, international networking, transferable skills
training, and quality insurance. These principles are particularly relevant because with an
increasing number of PhDs trained in Europe (from around 72 000 graduates in 2000 to 115
000 in 2011), it is expected that the majority of them will have careers outside academia
(European Commission 2014b: 24).
To make the EU more attractive for researchers and students from the third countries, in
2013 the Commission proposed a new directive to replace the Scientific Visa Directive
adopted in 2005 (European Commission 2014b: 26). In autumn 2015, the Council and the
European Parliament agreed on a draft directive. 68 It has been estimated that the total
number of non-EU researchers working in the EU is 70 000, constituting 5.6% of the total
amount of researchers working in the EU (IDEA Consult 2013: 19). The largest share of them
comes from China, India and the US and more than half of them works in the UK and
Germany. Additionally, in 2010, about 20% of doctoral candidates in the EU came from nonEU countries, with China and Brazil being the most prominent countries of origin (Ibid).
Almost two thirds of them were doing their PhDs in France or the UK.
One of the initiatives to increase the social security of internationally mobile researchers is
the single European pension arrangement RESAVER (Retirement Savings Vehicle for
European Research Institutions), which allows researchers to preserve their supplementary
pension benefits when they move between different countries 69. An initial RESAVER
employer consortium supported by the European Commission was launched on 1 October
2014. It consists of seven employer organizations and more organizations have joined since
then. It is planned that the RESAVER scheme will become operational in mid-2016 and over
a hundred members that have internationally mobile researchers will contribute in three
years time70. The members that have joined the consortium so far are mainly from a few
countries: Italy, Spain, Austria, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Hungary, Czech Republic,
Press release ‘New rules for the third-country researchers and students : Council confirms deal with
EP’. Press Office – General Secretariat of the Council 876/15. 26.11.2015.
69
Based on RESAVER website http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/index.cfm/rights/resaver Last accessed 19
October 2015. New RESAVER website launched in October 2015 available at http://www.resaver.eu/
Last accessed 29 October 2015.
70
Here and afterwards based on an interview with Andreas Dahlen, Policy Officer (RESAVER), DG
Research and Innovation, European Commission 09.09.2015
68

PE 581.382

36

European Research Area

Denmark and Ireland. The major concern is that in some of the leading European research
systems, such as Germany and France, national legislation does not allow public employers
to join the European pension arrangement. In Germany, a state agency administers pensions
for all public employees and it is not possible to contribute to any other pension fund except
the state agency. In France, university employees are civil servants whose pension is a
collective benefit scheme. Changes in national legislation would be needed for public
employers in Germany and France to join RESAVER. In the UK, universities contribute to a
special university pension scheme; thus, universities themselves would have to change the
rules of the scheme in the UK to be able to contribute to RESAVER. The establishment of
RESAVER is seen as a gradual process with an increasing number of employers joining over
the years, in particular after national rules in the main European research systems are
changed to allow for contributing to a European scheme. Mobile researchers will be able to
continuously accumulate their supplementary pensions when all research organizations with
mobile staff will have joined RESAVER; absence of major research organizations with
international staff in the UK, Germany and France from this scheme would be an obstacle for
researchers moving to and from these organizations.
How mobile are researchers in the EU? Survey data present a mixed picture on the
international mobility of researchers in the EU. While 31% of post-PhD researchers in the EU
have worked abroad (EU or worldwide) for more than three months at least once during the
last ten years, another 31% of EU researchers have never been internationally mobile in their
post-PhD career stages (IDEA Consult 2013: 17-18). Post-doctoral researchers are more likely
to be mobile than their counterparts in later career stages. 12% researchers (i.e. around 40%
of all mobile researchers) have worked abroad for a new employer (Ibid: 17). Female
researchers are less mobile than their male counterparts: for post-PhD male researchers, the
share of mobility longer than 3 months amounts to 28% compared to 21% of female
researchers (Ibid: 18). The main destinations for internationally mobile researchers are the
USA (18%), United Kingdom (11%), Germany (11%) and France (8%), while the main
mobility outflows are from Greece, Spain and Italy (Ibid: 23-24).
The main motives for international mobility are career progression (83%), working with
leading experts (75%), available funds (70%), facilities and equipment (69%) and positions
(69%) (Ibid: 25). The primary barriers to mobility for internationally mobile researchers are
obtaining funding for mobility and research (43.4%), logistical problems (36.3%) and finding
a suitable position (34.8%), while the main mobility barriers for non-mobile researchers are
personal and family reasons (67.4%), obtaining funding for mobility and research (55.9%)
and logistical problems (52%) (Ibid: 168-169). For more information on barriers for
international mobility, see Table 1.

Barriers
Obtaining funding for your
mobility/research
Logistical problems
Finding a suitable position
Facilities and equipment
for your research
Other
personal/family
reasons

PE 581.382

Importance of barrier for
mobile researchers in postPhD careers (Share of
researchers)
43.4%

Importance of barrier for nonmobile researchers in postPhD careers (Share of
researchers)
55.9%

36.3%
34.8%
27.9%

52%
49.9%
21.4%

26.5%

67.4%

37

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Potential loss of contact
with your professional
network
Language and/or culture
Quality of training and
education
Transferring your research
funding to another country

25.1%

28%

23.8%
21.1%

24.9%
21.7%

16.3%

26.4%

Table 1 Barriers to international mobility in the EU (IDEA Consult 2013: 168-9).
According to an OECD bibliometric study (OECD 2013: 1), ‘the research impact of scientists
who change affiliations across national boundaries is nearly 20% higher than that of those
who never move abroad’. Among the positive impacts of international mobility, researchers
themselves mention the quality, quantity and impact of their publications, the advancement
of research skills, and the development of international contacts and networks (IDEA
Consult 2013: 29). However, 31% of researchers also see a decrease in career progression as a
result of mobility, which might be due to ‘forced’ mobility (Ackers 2008) when there are no
job opportunities in their home country (Ibid). Thus, while international mobility leads many
benefits, it can also have more problematic reasons and effects.

Chapter 5 Gaps and Barriers
This chapter presents gaps and barriers in the ERA initiative identified in this study. The
presentation of gaps and barriers follows the overall structure of the study starting from
general ERA governance issues and then moving to the three specific ERA priorities
analysed in this study, namely, more effective national research systems, transnational
cooperation, and open labour market for researchers.
Insufficient coordination with other policies and initiatives: The development and
implementation of the ERA initiative still largely takes place within the field of research
policy; coordination with other policies and initiatives is insufficient. Realization of the ERA
priorities requires close coordination with other policies and initiatives such as innovation,
entrepreneurship, higher education and regional policies, the Bologna process and European
Higher Education Area, Horizon 2020, and European Structural and Investment Funds (the
latter being an important source of funding for ERA related reforms in many catching-up
research systems). Without this coordination it is not possible to achieve the ERA aims such
as reforms of national research systems (including better university-business interaction and
increasing investment from business sector), jointly addressing societal challenges that
require involvement of diverse actors, and training researchers for inter-sectoral mobility
between universities and private sector. To address this gap of insufficient integration of
different policy fields, the LERU (2014) has recommended linking education, research and
innovation in a European Education, Research and Innovation Area to ensure more
coherence among these closely related policy areas.
Limited range of interests represented in the ERA stakeholder platform In 2015, the most
recent ERA partnership was signed by the Commission and five stakeholder organizations:
the European Association of Research and Technology Organizations (EARTO), the
European University Association (EUA), the League of European Research Universities
(LERU), Science Europe, and the Conference of European Schools for Advanced Engineering
Education and Research (CESAER). These are the strongest research stakeholder

PE 581.382

38

European Research Area

organizations representing the main research performing and funding organizations.
However, other stakeholder organizations important for the ERA so far have been missing
from the platform; these include grassroots researcher organizations with valuable
information about the Open Labour Market for Researchers and business organizations
which are important research funders and performers as well as employers of researchers.
Involvement of additional stakeholders would help to avoid ‘a danger that those
stakeholders with stronger voices, more money and better organization are more present in
the political debate than other communities’ (Initiative for Science in Europe 2011: 3).
Additional risk of involving only a limited range of stakeholders is that awareness and
legitimacy of the ERA initiative among relevant stakeholder groups can remain low. The
ERA Progress Report 2014 stated that the stakeholders’ platform is a good instrument,
contributing to ERA policy-making and implementation and that it could be expanded to
include additional research players. A decision about the inclusion of new member
organizations is expected by the end of 2015.
Uneven progress across member states: There are major differences across the member states
in terms of reforming their national research and innovation systems (ERA priority 1 on
more effective research systems), their research and innovation performance and their R&D
expenditures. While partly these differences reflect long-standing divide between
North/West and South/East of Europe, there are also differences between Central and East
European countries which have recently undertaken reforms and those which have not. Lack
of reform and progress in a number of member states is not only a problem for their future
economic and social development; it is also a stumbling block for realising free circulation of
knowledge and people in the ERA because lagging behind countries have limited
possibilities to participate successfully in transnational cooperation (ERA priority 2) and in
open labour market for researchers (ERA priority 3). Differences in research performance
among the member states are not a new problem in the EU. Already in the early EU
Framework Programmes in the 1980s and 1990s there was a divide between northern
partners and cohesion countries (then including Greece, Spain, Ireland, and Portugal) (Sharp
1998). However, with recent EU enlargements the number of catching-up countries has
increased and with the launch of the ERA the divide between innovation leading and
catching-up countries hampers implementation of the ERA aims.
Narrow focus on project-based funding: While the establishment of more effective national
research systems (ERA Priority 1) is a broad aim, the ERA initiative largely operationalizes
this priority in terms of the share of project-based research funding as an effective allocation
mechanism for the best projects. It is a rather narrow and one-sided focus on positive effects
of project-based funding ignoring problematic ones identified by science policy experts and
stakeholders. Although project-based funding is an important characteristic of contemporary
research systems, constituting between a fourth to more than half of the total public research
funding in the OECD countries (Steen 2012), it also has some problematic effects. The
stakeholders have pointed out the lack of evidence on the effectiveness of project-based
funding (Science Europe 2014a). Project-based funding allocation can involve high costs for
research performing and funding organizations when preparing projects and administering
their evaluation, in particular in oversubscribed funding schemes with low success rates. It
has been pointed out that ‘competition becomes inefficient when success rates are too low to
support enough of the highest quality proposals’ (European Commission 2013: 13).
Moreover, high dependence on short-term project funding can be counter-productive for
researching long-term complex problems (Ulnicane 2015b). Studies of institutional
conditions facilitating scientific creativity and breakthroughs suggest the importance of
availability of diverse funding sources including long-term institutional funding which
provides some stability and allows for tackling risky and complex research problems (Heinze

PE 581.382

39

Cost of Non-Europe Report

et al. 2009; Hollingsworth 2008). More balanced evaluation of benefits and costs of projectfunding is missing from the ERA initiative.
Lack of output evaluation of jointly addressing grand challenges: So far the ERA Priority 2
on transnational cooperation mainly focuses on inputs in transnational cooperation for
jointly addressing grand challenges, namely on number joint funding initiatives among
national funding agencies, number of joint calls and funding allocated. However,
information about outcomes and outputs of joint programmes is missing and there is no
systematic evidence about the scope and quality of their results e.g., new knowledge,
publications, patents, and products (see also European Commission 2013: 18). Thus, it is not
possible to assess if the joint programmes have lived up to expectations and delivered their
stated aims of addressing societal challenges in a more efficient way. Science Europe (2015)
has pointed out the need for a thorough assessment of existing Joint Programming Initiatives
in terms of their quality and contribution to advancing their field of knowledge and
addressing the societal challenges. That would help to assess the added value of JPIs.
Assessment of joint programs is also needed in order to establish if any changes in this
arrangement are needed and how to design further joint programmes.
Lack of support for bottom-up trans-national research collaboration: While the ERA Priority
2 on transnational cooperation focuses on supporting collaboration in the two important
areas of addressing grand challenges and establishing and operating research infrastructures,
it largely neglects support for bottom-up scientific collaborations. Data on the rapidly
increasing share of internationally co-authored scientific articles (Adams 2013; Wagner et al
2015) suggest that bottom-up international collaborations are an increasingly important
mode of knowledge production and lead to high impact and high quality research. Science
policy scholars have recognized that ‘it is important to enable and construct international
approaches both top down-driven by social challenges and bottom up–driven by the needs
of scientists and the initiative of funders’ (Edler 2012: 332). However, support for bottom-up
international research collaborations is largely neglected in the ERA initiative which focuses
mainly on supporting top-down collaborations; additionally, stakeholders are concerned that
support for such bottom-up international collaborations is increasingly neglected in Horizon
2020 as well (Nicholson 2015). Lack of funding opportunities for bottom-up international
research collaboration can hamper collaborations that bring together high quality, highly
specialized expertise and lead to high impact outputs. Funding models suggested by Science
Europe (2014b) such as ‘Money follows Cooperation Line’ and ‘The Lead Agency
Agreement’ can broaden opportunities to support international collaborations including
bottom-up collaborations.
Unidirectional flows of researchers: A recent pilot study of doctorate holders suggests that
talent mobility in Europe is largely unidirectional, with researchers from Southern and
Eastern Europe moving to work in Northern Europe and thereby further increasing existing
asymmetries in the ERA (European Science Foundation 2015). Additionally, an OECD
bibliometric study (OECD 2013: 3) suggests that for some countries such as the UK the
quality of incoming scientists exceeds that of outgoing, while for other countries such as Italy
the opposite is true. These trends are not surprising in light of the differences in the
performance and funding of national research systems discussed in chapter 2 and the
motives for international mobility – career progression, working with leading experts,
available funds, facilities and equipment, and positions – outlined in Chapter 471. These

71

As one way to reverse the brain drain, new member states have suggested changes in Horizon 2020
salary payment system allowing to pay the same salaries for researchers working on Horizon 2020
projects across EU-28 (Maukola 2015). However, this small measure is unlikely to solve broader

PE 581.382

40

European Research Area

trends indicate that instead of mutually beneficial circulation of knowledge and researchers
envisaged by the ERA, there is a risk of a unidirectional brain drain taking place in Europe.
Lack of open, transparent and merit-based recruitment: According to survey results, 34-40%
of researchers are dissatisfied with the levels of openness and transparency as well as the
degree of merit-based recruitment of their institutions (IDEA Consult 2013: 32) 72. There are
big differences between countries in satisfaction with the highest share of satisfied
researchers (around 80%) in the UK and the lowest share (between 30 and 45%) in Italy. The
Researchers Report 2014 points out a sharp contrast in perceptions of the recruitment process
of national authorities and researchers (European Commission 2014e: 43-51). While the vast
majority of national authorities consider their national recruitment systems to be largely
open and transparent, the perception of many researchers, in particular in some member
states, is that recruitment procedures are neither open nor transparent and are characterized
by protectionism, nepotism, and a lack of human resources strategy and information.
An interview with a main European research stakeholder organization revealed that they
have reservations about open and transparent recruitment. 73 While they find open
recruitment to be important at early career stages and as a tool to support gender equality,
they see the request to follow open recruitment procedures as a hampering factor when a top
university wants to hire a leading scientist who is already known for his/her high quality
publications; in such cases, they see the need to organize an open competition as a waste of
resources, a problem for university autonomy, and a burden for a leading scientist. While in
the long-term, open recruitment can have many benefits in selecting the most productive and
talented researchers and can make research institutions more attractive, an open selection
procedure also has costs: according to the estimates, the costs for recruiting a single
employee can vary between 5000 and 20 000 euros, which includes advertising, searching,
processing the high number of applications, reading and assessing applications, attending
meetings, and travel and relocation costs (European Commission 2012b: 80-81).
Survey results reveal that one of the main barriers for international mobility is difficulty to
find a suitable position (see Table 1 above) indicating that further improvements in open,
transparent and merit-based recruitment are needed for a well-functioning open labour
market for researchers.
Low participation in EU initiatives establishing open labour market for researchers: While a
number of crucial initiatives for the establishment of open labour market for researchers
have been developed and promoted at the EU level, a relatively low number of research
organizations are participating in some of them. It is expected that only over hundred
research organizations will initially participate in the RESAVER scheme for portability of
supplementary pensions. In the field of human resources policies, only 250 research
organizations has received the ‘HR Excellence in Research’ award for making progress in
implementing the Code and the Charter in their human resource policies. Research
organizations from a number of member states are underrepresented or absent from these
initiatives either due to legal (RESAVER) or other reasons. This low participation rate in
some of the key initiatives for open labour market for researchers can be an important barrier
differences in attractiveness of national research systems and respond to more complex motivations for
mobility.
72
These are perceptions of ‘insiders’ evaluating their own insitution; to get a better understanding in
the future, it would be useful to also have a survey of ‘outsiders’ who have applied for positions
coming from other institutions and countries.
73
An interview with a representsative of a European research stakeholder organization 19.09.2014.
(undertaken within a previous research project).

PE 581.382

41

Cost of Non-Europe Report

for free circulation of researchers, their social welfare and open, transparent and merit-based
recruitment.
Limited portability of and access to national research grants: Internationally mobile
researchers mention obtaining funding for mobility and research (43.3%) and transferring
research funding to another country (16.3%) among mobility barriers. These results point to
two barriers for international mobility of researchers: firstly, there are limited opportunities
for the cross-border portability of national research grants; and secondly, the residence and
institutional affiliation requirements are among eligibility criteria for many national research
grants conditioning access to research grants for non-nationals (European Commission
2012c). When two or three years of prior residence in the country are requested, then
researchers who have recently moved to work on short-term contracts cannot apply. While
some grants such as the European Research Council grants are portable across organizational
and national borders, only few national funding agencies allow grant portability to other
countries (Ibid). One exception is the agreement between national research funding agencies
of Germany, Austria and Switzerland (known as D-A-CH agreement) allowing for
portability of research grants between the three countries. In 2014, Science Europe suggested
national research funding organizations to implement ‘Money follows Researcher’ model
allowing researchers to take with them the remainder of a grant to another country (Science
Europe 2014b).
Limited dual career opportunities: The main mobility barrier mentioned by non-mobile
researchers (67.4%) is personal and family reasons (IDEA Consult 2013: 169). Family reasons
are often related to dual career pressures of finding suitable employment for both partners
(European Science Foundation 2015). While existing dual career services mostly address
senior researchers, the European Council of Doctoral Candidates and Junior Researchers
(EURODOC) has suggested that more European countries and institutions need to introduce
dual career services and that dual career opportunities need to be available at all stages of the
research career including early stages (EURODOC 2014). As emphasised by the EURODOC,
the availability of dual career services has important implications for a work-life balance, the
diversity of the workplace, international mobility and career development, in particular for
young female researchers.
Language barriers: While some have suggested that ‘language barriers to movement for
those with doctorate-level education are minimal given near universality of English language
communication in the science community’ (European Science Foundation 2015: 32), survey
data demonstrate that 23.8% of internationally mobile researchers mention language and
culture as barriers for international mobility (IDEA Consult 2013: 168). Although research
and teaching activities in English at European universities are increasing, many academic
posts (in particular those involving teaching) require proficiency in the national language.
While some universities mention in their job advertisements that support for successful
international candidates for learning the national language within the first two or three years
of employment will be provided, other academic job advertisements requesting proficiency
in the national language do not make any mention of either support or time given to learn it.
It is important that requirements for knowledge of the national language are reasonable and
are not used as a protectionist measure to favour local candidates.
Unclear demand for researchers: In 2011, there were 1.63 million researchers in the EU
(European Commission 2014e: 17). The Innovation Union communication states that ‘the EU
will need at least one million new research jobs if it is to reach the R&D target of 3%’
(European Commission 2010b: 9). However, as discussed in Chapter 2, it is not expected that
the 3% R&D funding target will be reached by 2020. In the context of limited research

PE 581.382

42

European Research Area

funding, question of lack of absorptive capacities in academic institutions of growing supply
of doctorate holders has become increasingly relevant (European Science Foundation 2015:
11). Policy statements suggest that doctoral holders should have skills that would enable
them to work in other sectors such as business. However, evidence about the absorptive
capacities in business and other sectors of researchers is missing. Without evidence about
demand for researchers in different sectors, it is not possible to evaluate if Europe has too
little or too many researchers. Just comparing number of researchers in the EU with the US
and Japan does not provide sufficient evidence due to differences in funding and business
sectors; moreover, also in the US there is an ongoing discussion if the US has too little or too
many researchers (Stephan 2012).
Job insecurity: Many researchers work on fixed-term contracts, particular in earlier career
stages (IDEA Consult 2013). Job insecurity is seen as the most important barrier to pursing a
research career (Ibid: 11). In recent years, permanent contracts are awarded less often than
before (Ibid: 76). A higher share of male researchers currently holds a permanent contract:
66% as opposed to 58% of the female researchers (Ibid: 77).

Chapter 6 Conclusions and Recommendations
Since the establishment of the ERA initiative in 2000, important steps have been taken to
provide treaty basis for the ERA, to define its priorities, to develop governance structures in
form of a partnership between the Commission, the Member States and research stakeholder
organizations as well as to establish a set of policy instruments to implement the ERA
priorities. This study analysed the remained gaps and barriers in the ERA initiative and in
particular in its first three priorities of more effective national research systems, transnational cooperation, and open labour market for researchers. How can these gaps be
addressed?
A particular interest of the European Parliamentary Research Service has been about
possibility to address the gaps and barriers through legislative action. As discussed in the
Chapter 1, although some stakeholders and politicians have called for a legal route to ensure
implementation of the ERA, there are important reservations in particular from the Council
that would have to play a key role in adopting any potential legislation. Calls for ERA
legislation have portrayed a legal option as more efficient way of the ERA implementation
than current approach based on partnership and open method of coordination. However,
such calls typically provide little detail and analysis on what the ERA legislation would
entail and how it would work.
A legal study undertaken by Arne Pilniok and commissioned by the European Commission
(Pilniok 2014) provides a thorough analysis of different legislative options, their pros and
cons. After extensive analysis of different options of translating ERA into legislation – hard
and soft law, framework directive and sector-specific regulations on different ERA priorities,
he concludes regarding potential legislative measures for the ERA that ‘caution is advised,
given both the competence structure between the EU and the Member States, and the
protection of academic freedom as enshrined in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. […]
the role of (binding) law should not be overestimated as a steering mechanism for the
research system’ (Ibid: 3). If political decision is made to proceed with legislative option, then
Pilniok recommends to focus on removal of barriers to transnational mobility and research
and to install reflexive governance structures for coordination and cooperation that would
support continuous learning. According to him, removal of barriers to transnational mobility
would encompass open recruitment procedures, access to and portability of research grants,

PE 581.382

43

Cost of Non-Europe Report

social security rules including pensions and access to research infrastructures. While such
rules can promote transnational mobility, they can also encounter difficulties, for example,
access to and portability of research grants can lead to cross-national imbalances due to the
differences in attractiveness of national research systems 74 (Pilniok 2014).
Based on the analysis of the ERA initiative undertaken within this study, it can be
concluded that due to several reasons the legal option is unlikely to provide a quick and
efficient measure for completing the ERA, as it is sometimes depicted in the ERA debates.
Legally binding measures to facilitate the open labour market for researchers such as
portability of research grants and open, transparent and merit-based recruitment can
contradict with subsidiarity of member states and autonomy of research funding
organizations and research performing organizations. Such measures can cause resistance,
be difficult to adopt in the Council and to control their implementation by research
funders and research performers. If political decision for legal measures is considered,
then it is important that such measures are part of a broader long-term policy including a
mix of policy instruments (also learning and awareness measures, national and EU
funding instruments) supported and implemented by a broad partnership of EU and
national institutions and stakeholders.
Several of the gaps and barriers identified in this study are closely related indicating the
need for systemic long-term solutions. Unidirectional flow of researchers from South/East to
North/West of Europe is closely linked to uneven progress of reforming national research
systems across the EU. To address these challenges, efficient implementation of measures
reforming and making catching-up research systems more attractive is a key. Measures
already launched include smart specialization strategies supported by the European
Structural and Investment Funds and Spreading Excellence and Widening Participation
measures funded by the Horizon 2020. It is important that these and other measures support
long-term changes in catching-up research systems increasing their research capabilities,
human resources, and national public and private R&D funding as well as ensuring open,
transparent and merit-based recruitment. Additional measures can be considered such as
scientific diaspora policies utilizing intellectual and social capital of nationals working
abroad to support reforms, capability building and internationalization of research in their
countries of origin. National ERA roadmaps to be developed in 2016 can be an opportunity
to develop tailor-made reform programmes enabling all member states to fully participate,
contribute to and benefit from cooperation and competition in the ERA initiative and open
labour market for researchers.
A number of gaps and barriers identified in this study are closely related to other ERA
priorities that are beyond the scope of this study. Analysis of the ERA priority 3 on Open
Labour Market for Researchers revealed a gender gap of female researchers being less
internationally mobile and having less job security than their male colleagues. The gender
gap in research employment has to be addressed in the context of the ERA priority 4 on
gender equality that is beyond the scope of this study.
Moreover, the realization of the ERA priorities of more efficient research systems, optimal
transnational cooperation and open labour market for researchers is closely related to
ongoing changes in research governance towards more project-funding, short-term
employment and evaluation. In future assessments of the ERA initiative, a balanced review

74

Interview with a representative of a national research funding council for this study confirmed that
differences in attractiveness of national research grants in different member states is a main obstacle
for supporting cross-border portability of research grants.

PE 581.382

44

European Research Area

of benefits and costs of project-funding, short-term employment and increased evaluation is
needed.
A broadened partnership between EU institutions, member states and research stakeholders
including additional actors and linking up to other relevant policy fields such as innovation
and education can help to address the remaining related gaps in the ERA initiative such as
limited reforms in a number of national research systems and barriers to free circulation of
researchers. An enhanced mix of policy instruments when voluntary and awareness raising
measures are increasingly linked to European and national research funding can be
considered as an option for future ERA policy. In this context, a thorough assessment of the
effects of recent policy that obliges Horizon 2020 beneficiaries to implement human resource
principles set out in the Code of Conduct for the Recruitment of Researchers would be
necessary. That would help to evaluate if a mix of voluntary, awareness and funding
measures can be an efficient tool to promote academic practices and culture necessary for
open labour market of researchers. Historically, the EU Framework Programme funding has
played an important role in defining national research priorities, understanding of
excellence, and evaluation criteria; it remains to be seen if Horizon 2020 (together with
appropriate awareness raising and information measures) can promote changes in cultures
and mind-sets towards truly open, transparent and merit-based academic recruitment and if
a similar mix of funding and awareness raising measures can be used in the future to
promote the ERA aims.
The ERA initiative is dynamic and continuously developing. Important processes in the
initiative were going on but were not yet finalized during the preparation of this study in
the second half of 2015 (adoption of new directive on the third-country researchers,
finalization of new ERA indicators, expansion of the ERA stakeholder forum, etc.). Further
important developments are scheduled to take place in 2016, for example, the ERA national
roadmaps have to be developed and the European arrangement for supplementary pensions
for mobile researchers RESAVER should become operational. Implementation of these recent
and forthcoming measures will have important influence on the future realization of the
ERA initiative and the Open Labour Market for Researchers.

PE 581.382

45

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Bibliography
Ackers, L. (2008) Internationalisation, mobility and metrics: A new form of indirect
discrimination? Minerva 46(4): 411-435.
Adams, J. (2013) The fourth age of research. Nature 497: 557-560.
Andrée, D. (2015) EU legislation in the European Research and Innovation Area? Policy Brief
by the Research, Innovation, and Science Policy Experts (RISE). European Commission.
Barcelona European Council (2002) Presidency Conclusions. 15 and 16 March 2002.
Chou, M.H. and Ulnicane, I. (2015) Introduction: New Horizons in the Europe of Knowledge.
Journal of Contemporary European Research. 11(1): 4-15.
Council of the European Union (2014) Conclusions on the progress in the European Research
Area. Competititveness Council meeting Brussels 21.02.2014.
Council of the European Union (2015) Conclusions on the European Research Area Roadmap
2015-2020 Brussels 29.05.2015.
Crawford, E., Shinn, T., & Sorlin, S. (Eds.). (1993). Denationalizing Science. The Contexts of
International Scientific Practice. Dordrecht: Springer.
Edler, J. (2012) Toward Variable Funding for International Science. Science 338: 331-332.
ERAC (2014) ERAC opinion on Member States’ reporting on Research and Innovation
reforms in view of their National Reform Programs. ERAC 1209/14.
ERAC (2015) ERAC Opinion on the European Research Area Roadmap 2015-2020. ERAC
1208/15. 20.04.2015.
EURODOC (2014) Dual Career Opportunities for Doctoral Candidates and Early Stage
Researcher. February 2014.
European Commission (2000) Towards a European Research Area. Communication.
COM(2000) 6. Brussels. 18.1.2000.
European Commission (2010a) Europe 2020. A strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive
growth. Communication from the Commission. 3.3.2010. COM(2010) 2020.
European Commission (2010b) Europe 2020 Flagship Initiative Innovation Union.
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of regions. SEC(2010) 1161.
European Commission (2012a) A Reinforced European research Area Partnership for
Excellence and Growth. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament,
the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the
Regions. COM(2012) 392. Brussels 17.7.2012.

PE 581.382

46

European Research Area

European Commission (2012b) Impact assessment accompanying
the document
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions A Reinforced
European research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth. SWD(2012 212. Brussels
17.7.2012.
European Commission (2012c) Access to and portability of grants. Report adopted by the
ERA Steering Group on Human Resources and Mobility. 23.05.2012. Brussels.
European Commission (2013) Recommendations on the Implementation of the ERA
Communication. Report of the Expert group 2013. European Commission.
European Commission (2014a) European Research Area: Progress Report 2014.
Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament COM
(2014) 575. Brussels 15.9.2014.
European Commission (2014b) European Research Area: Facts and Figures 2014. EUR 26803
EN.
European Commission (2014c) Taking stock of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart,
sustainable and inclusive growth. Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of
Regions. 5.3.2014. COM (2014) 130.
European Commission (2014d) Research and innovation as sources of renewed growth.
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions. 10.6.2014.
COM(2014) 339.
European Commission (2014e) Researchers’ Report 2014. Final Report. Deloitte.
European Commission (2015) Innovation Union Scoreboard 2015. European Union.
European Science Foundation (2015) Career Tracking of Doctorate Holders. Pilot Project
Report. Strasbourg.
European Union (2013) Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and the
Council of 17 December 2013 laying down common provisions of the European Regional
Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the European
Agricultural Fund for Rural Development and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund
and laying down general provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the
European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund and the European maritime and Fisheries Fund
and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006.
Federal Government (2014) Strategy of the Federal Government on the European Research
Area. Guidelines and National Roadmap. Germany.
Groves J. (2015) EU hiring rules could catch out universities, warns Brussels. Times Higher
Education 14.09.2015.
Heinze, T., Shapira, P., Rogers, J. and Senker, J. (2009) Organizational and institutional
influences on creativity in scientific research. Research Policy 38(4): 610-23.

PE 581.382

47

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Hicks, D., Wouters, P., Waltman, L., de Rijcke, S. and Rafols, I. (2015) The Leiden Manifesto
for research metrics. Nature 520: 429-431.
Hollingsworth, J.R. (2008) Scientific Discoveries: An Institutional and Path-dependent
Perspective. In C.Hannaway (eds.) Biomedicine in the Twentieth Century: Practices, Policies, and
Politics. Bethesda: National Institute of Health: 317-53.
IDEA Consult (2013) Support for continued data collection and analysis concerning mobility
patterns and career paths of researchers. Final report MORE2. Brussels, August 2013.
Initiative for Science in Europe (2011) Response to the Consultation on the ERA Framework.
November 2011.
Kaiser, R. and H.Prange-Gstöhl (2010) A paradigm shift in European R&D policy? The EU
Budget Review and the economic crisis. Science and Public Policy 37(4): 253-65.
LERU (2014) An ERA of Change. LERU Briefing Paper for the EU Institutions. Leuven.
LERU (2015) ERAC ERA Roadmap 2015-2020: Nothing new under the sun, LERU Press
release 16.04.2015. Available at http://www.leru.org/index.php/public/news/erac-eraroadmap-2015-2020-nothing-new-under-the-sun/ Last accessed 13 October 2015.

Lisbon European Council (2000) Presidency Conclusions, 23 and 24 March.
Maukola, J. (2015) Debate on Horizon 2020 salaries escalates. Research Europe 23.09.2015.
Moedas, C. (2014) Three pillars of disruptive innovation for Europe. Speech at 6 th European
Innovation Summit, European Parliament, Brussels, 17.11.2014.
Nedeva, M. (2013) Between the global and the national: Organising European science.
Research Policy 42: 220-30.
Nicholson, C. (2015) Concern as Horizon 2020 emphasis shifts. Research Europe 10.09.2015.
OECD (2013) Researchers on the move: The impact of brain circulation. OECD Directorate for
Science, Technology and Industry.
OECD (2014) OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2014. OECD.
OECD (2015) OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2015: Innovation for
Growth. OECD.
Pilniok, A. (2014) Translating ERA into legislation? How to ensure the completion of ERA.
European Commission.
Sartori, A. and Berlinguer, L. (2013) European Research Area. A Maastricht for Research.
September 2013. Available at
http://www.eblida.org/News/A_Maastricht_for_Research-September2013.pdf?PHPSESSID=0f90446ed86b79af9b6b8a2a78f9041c Last accessed 13 October 2015.
Science Europe (2014a) On Priority One of the 2012 ERA Communication: ‘More Effective
National research Systems’. Position Statement. Brussels.

PE 581.382

48

European Research Area

Science Europe (2014b) Practical Guide to Three Approaches to Cross-Border Collaboration.
Brussels.
Science Europe (2015) On the Role and Future of Joint Programming. Position Statement.
Brussels.
Sharp, M. (1998) Competitiveness and cohesion – are the two compatible? Research Policy
27(6): 569-88.
Steen, J.V. (2012) Modes of public funding of research and development: Towards
internationally comparable indicators. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers
4. Paris: OECD.
Stephan, P. (2012) How economics shapes science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ulnicane, I. (2015a) Broadening Aims and Building Support in Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy: The Case of the European Research Area. Journal of Contemporary European
Research. 11(1): 31-49.
Ulnicane, I. (2015b) Why do international research collaborations last? Virtuous circle of
feedback loops, continuity and renewal. Science and Public Policy 42(4): 433-447.
Veugelers, R. (2014) Undercutting the Future? European Research Spending in Times of
Fiscal Consolidation. Bruegel Policy Contribution, Issue 2014/06.
Wagner, C.S., Park H.W., and Leydesdorff, L. (2015) The Continuing Growth of Global
Cooperation Networks in Research: A Conundrum for National Governments. PLoS ONE
10(7).
Whitley, R. (2011) Changing Governance and Authority Relations in the Public Sciences.
Minerva 49: 359-85.

PE 581.382

49

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Annex 1: List of experts interviewed75
1.

Dr. Peter Tindemans, Secretary General, Euroscience, A European non-profit grassroots association of researchers in Europe 25.08.2015.
2. Dan Andrée, Senior Advisor, Vinnova, Swedish member at the ERAC, member of the
RISE group 02.09.2015.
3. Richard Tuffs, Director, ERRIN European Regions Research and Innovation Network
02.09.2015.
4. Prof. Claudine Hermann, Vice-President of the EPWS European Platform of Women
Scientists 03.09.2015.
5. Vanessa Ravagni, Chair of the ERA working group at EARMA European
Associations of research Managers and Administrators 08.09.2015.
6. Dimitri Corpakis, Head of Unit B5 Spreading excellence and widening participation,
DG Research and Innovation, European Commission 08.09.2015.
7. Dr. Wolfgang Eppenschwandtner, Executive Coordinator, ISE Initiative for Science in
Europe 09.09.2015.
8. Andreas Dahlen, Policy Officer (RESAVER), DG Research and Innovation, European
Commission 09.09.2015.
9. Dr. Gordon Dalton, Chair, ICORSA International Consortium of Research Staff
Associations 11.09.2015.
10. Dr. Anjana Buckow, Programme Director Research Careers, DFG Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, European Network on Research Careers, Member of the
Science Europe Working Group on Research Careers 15.09.2015.
11. Manfred Horvat, Senior Advisor, CESAER Conference of European Schools for
Advanced Engineering Education and Research. 02.10.2015.
12. Margaux Kerrschot, President, EURODOC The European Council of Doctoral
Candidates and Junior Researchers 02.10.2015.
13. Alea Lopez de San Roman, Policy Officer, LERU League of European Research
Universities 02.10.2015.
14. Fabienne Gautier, Head of Unit B2 ‘ERA Policy and Reform’, DG Research and
Innovation, European Commission 02.10.2015.
15. Dr. Maria Bostenaru Dan, Administrative Board member, Marie Curie Fellows
Association 19.10.2015.
16. Dr. Jan-Eric Sundgren, Chairman of Research and Technological Innovation Working
Group, BUSINESS EUROPE. Senior Adviser, AB Volvo, 21.10.2015.

75

Interview requests were also sent to some more decision-makers and stakeholder organizations, who did not
answer them during the time of study August-October 2015. Additionally, the study draws on an existing database
of approximately 100 expert interviews.

PE 581.382

50

European Research Area

Annex II

Research Paper on the Implementation of an Integrated
European Research Area

Research paper
by Laura de Haan, Paul Vroonhof (Panteia), Simon
Broek (Ockham IPS)

Abstract
Based on a description of the European Research Area (ERA) implementation and
assessment of progress, a quantification of the distance to target of the ERA
implementation is provided. When looking merely at the quantitative information,
the distance to target of 19% of the projected 16 billion euros revenue of full ERA
implementation and can be considered as the costs due to incomplete
implementation. This amounts to €3 billion annually. It should be clear that this is
a simplified method of quantifying an area that is not quantified easily. Several
key barriers are identified in relation to ERA implementation. Given these
barriers, the Roadmap 2015-2020 approach is a positive development, able to
overcome these barriers. In this approach, it is recommended to foster
inclusiveness of all countries, and use knowledge exchange and self-assessment to
provide directions for improvement.

PE 581.382

51

Cost of Non-Europe Report

AUTHOR
This paper has been written by Laura de Haan and Paul Vroonhof of Panteia and
Simon Broek of Ockham IPS, at the request of the European Added Value Unit of the
Directorate for Impact Assessment and European Added Value, within the Directorate
General for Parliamentary Research Services (DG EPRS) of the General Secretariat of
the European Parliament. It is part of a Cost of Non-Europe report produced for the
European Parliament’s Committee on Industry, Energy and Research.
RESPONSIBLE ADMINISTRATORS
Christian Salm and Thomas Zandstra, European Added Value Unit
To contact the Unit, please e-mail EPRS-EuropeanAddedValueUnit@ep.europa.eu

LINGUISTIC VERSIONS
Original: EN
DISCLAIMER
The opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and
do not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.
Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorized, provided
the source is acknowledged and the publisher is given prior notice and sent a copy.
Manuscript completed in February 2016
Brussels © European Union, 2016.

PE 581.382

52

European Research Area

Contents
Executive Summary ..................................................................................................................... 54
Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................... 56
1.Background and Research questions ...................................................................................... 57
1.1 Introduction .................................................................................................................... 57
1.2 Focus and research questions ....................................................................................... 57
1.3 Approach of the study and important conceptual warnings .................................. 58
Methodology ........................................................................................................................ 60
2.The case studies consisted of desk research and semi-structured interviews with experts
from each country by phone. State of play ERA implementation ......................................... 61
2.1 Background of the introduction of the European Research Area ........................... 61
2.2 State of play of implementation in four countries ..................................................... 65
2.3 Success rates Horizon 2020 ........................................................................................... 70
2.4 Progression and need for further action: ERA Roadmap 2015-2020 ...................... 71
3.Assessment of ERA implementation: gaps and barriers...................................................... 75
3.1 Reflections on the role of Member States governments in the ERA implementation
........................................................................................................................................ 76
3.2 Reflections on the role of Research stakeholder organisations in the ERA
implementation............................................................................................................ 77
3.3 Reflections on the role of the European Commission in the ERA implementation78
3.4 Gaps and barriers........................................................................................................... 79
4.Distance to target: quantification ............................................................................................ 83
4.1 Member State reforms in all ERA priorities ............................................................... 85
4.2 Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the Communication by
research stakeholders .................................................................................................. 85
4.3 Increased support from the Commission to national ERA policies ........................ 85
4.4 Conclusion ...................................................................................................................... 85
5.Recommendations: Towards further implementation of ERA .......................................... 86
Annex: Methodology and sources ............................................................................................. 88
Calculating distance to target............................................................................................. 88
Selection of countries........................................................................................................... 91
Interviews ............................................................................................................................. 94
Bibliography ......................................................................................................................... 95

PE 581.382

53

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Executive Summary
The focus of this report is on the implementation of an integrated European Research Area
(ERA) from 2012 until now. The report aims to analyse the costs deriving from an
incomplete implementation of the European Research Area. In order to do so, the report
firstly describes the state of play of ERA implementation; secondly, assesses the ERA
implementation progression; thirdly, provides a quantification of ‘distance to target’; and
lastly, identifies barriers for implementation and provides directions for improvement
(recommendations). The summary is structured in the same way.
State of play ERA implementation
A key milestone in the development of the ERA is the 2012 Communication, in which the
Commission establishes the need for a reinforced ERA partnership between Member
States, the Commission and research stakeholder organisations. Five ERA priorities were
defined by the Commission: more effective national research systems; optimal
transnational co-operation and; an open labour market for researchers; gender equality
and gender mainstreaming in research; optimal circulation, access to and transfer of
scientific knowledge (including via digital ERA). In December 2014, the Council of the
European Union acknowledged that there was good progress and that the conditions for
the ERA were now in place. However, the Progress Reports (2013 and 2014) were not able
to show an overall ranking of countries on the implementation of the ERA, making it
difficult to quantify and compare countries’ good progress. As the Member States have
different systems and pace, the road towards the ERA differs. In May 2015, the Council of
the European Union endorsed the ERA Roadmap 2015-2020. The ERA Roadmap identifies
top priority actions and explicitly recognises the different characteristics of national
research and innovation systems across Europe. The ERA Roadmap approach better
acknowledges the open-ended nature of the ERA, meaning that implementation is a
continuous process not reaching a final stage of completion as new challenges and barriers
arise on the way, as opposed to the ‘completion’ conception, as used in the 2012
Communication and underlying the 2012 Impact Assessment.
Assessment of ERA implementation
As success of the ERA remains undefined, assessing the level of implementation is
difficult. Yet, stakeholders consider the following benefits of the ERA: it opens a dialogue
and provides an opportunity for knowledge exchange; it creates possibilities for
cooperation across borders; for less developed countries, it helps in mainstreaming
research into policy and to adopt policy lines. The Policy Support Facility is very
important in this respect, and is expected by the stakeholders to have beneficial effects on
using funding optimally as this initiative creates possibilities for mutual learning.
A common criticism, acknowledged with the ERA Roadmap, is that there has been too
little room for heterogeneity: Differences in the ERA benefits can create a disincentive to
continue; Actions and priorities that are too much ‘one size fits all’; Becoming a uniform
research area, shouldn’t be the aim and is not beneficial. With the Roadmap, at European
level, different perspectives on the ERA gain more space. At national level, the lack of
funds to implement the ERA, creates a barrier in implementation and therefore, hampers
the expected benefits. The research innovation policies are too fragmented and there is still

PE 581.382

54

European Research Area

a lack of coordination. Coordinated efforts may lead to more effective cost sharing and
may prevent fragmentation and duplication of efforts.

Distance to target: quantification
When combining the proportion of completion for the different actors (Member States
81%, Research stakeholder organisations 81%, Commission 80%), we come to a total
completion of 81%, which means the distance to target for the ERA implementation is 19%.
In the 2012 Impact Assessment it was concluded that the integration of the European
Research Area could result in a gain of 16 billion euros GDP annually from 2030 onwards.
When looking merely at the quantitative information, the distance to target of 19% of the
projected 16 billion revenue of the full ERA implementation, can be considered as the costs
due to incomplete implementation. This amounts to € 3 billion annually. These figures
have to be interpreted with caution, as there are several conceptual problems in
quantifying the progress towards the ERA, the most important being that ‘completing’ the
ERA does not do justice to the true nature of the ERA as an open-ended process.
Recommendations
Several key barriers are identified in relation to the ERA implementation: differences in
ERA benefits, resulting in a disincentive to continue; one-size-fits-all approach which does
not fit with countries’ heterogeneity in research systems; lack of political
priority/insufficient funds. Given these barriers, the Roadmap 2015-2020 approach is a
positive development, able to overcome them. In this approach it is recommended to
foster inclusiveness of all countries, and use knowledge exchange and self-assessment to
provide directions for improvement.

PE 581.382

55

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Abbreviations
ANI
CESAER
EARTO
EC
EMM
ERA
ERAC
EU
EUA
FP7
GDP
LERU
NG
R&D
RFO
RPO
RSO

PE 581.382

National Innovation Agency
Conference of European Schools for Advanced Engineering Education and
Research
European Association of Research and Technology Organisations
European Commission
ERA monitoring mechanism
European Research Area
European Research Area and Innovation Committee
European Union
European University Association
Framework Programme 7
Gross Domestic Product
League of European Research Universities
National Government
Research & Development
Research Funding Organisations
Research Performing Organisations
Research Stakeholder Organisations

56

European Research Area

1. Background and Research questions
1.1 Introduction
The European Research Area (ERA) was introduced in 2000 to support the Lisbon
Agenda, that contained the EU’s strategic economic development goals. Research policy
was then established as a shared competence between the European Commission and the
Member States.76 In 2007, the European Research Area (ERA) was formally taken up in
the Treaty of Lisbon with the objective of resulting in a: “unified research area open to the
world, based on the Internal Market, in which researchers, scientific knowledge and technology
circulate freely and through which the Union and its Member States strengthen their scientific and
technological bases, their competitiveness and their capacity to collectively address grand
challenges”.77 A more structured implementation of the ERA commenced in 2012 with the
definition of five ERA priorities:
1. More effective national research systems.
2. Optimal transnational co-operation and competition
3. An open labour market for researchers
4. Gender equality and gender mainstreaming in research
5. Optimal circulation, access to and transfer of scientific knowledge (including via
digital ERA).
The European Parliament closely monitors the progress of the ERA implementation.
Currently, the question arises as to how far implementation has progressed. This report
aims to analyse the costs of a non-European derivation from an incomplete
implementation of the ERA.

1.2 Focus and research questions
The focus for this research paper lies with the implementation of three specific ERA
priorities:
1.
2.
5.

The establishment of more effective national research systems;
The realisation of optimal transnational co-operation and competition;
The realisation of optimal circulation and access to and transfer of scientific
knowledge (including via digital ERA).

However, it should be noted that due to the complex and comprehensive nature of ERA,
concentrating only on part of the priorities is analytically problematic. Therefore, the
research paper takes into account all priorities, although its focus is on the above
mentioned three.
The research paper will address the following questions:
Description
 What is the state of play of the establishment of the ERA infrastructure (related to the
three priorities)?

76

Article 182.5 of the Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, cited in ICF International (2015). Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member
States and Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation.
77
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication from the Commission to the
Council and the European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014

PE 581.382

57

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Assessment
 What benefits can be expected from the implementation of the ERA infrastructure? 78
 To what extent will the current ERA infrastructure, as established by the Commission,
lead to a better or optimal use of funds at EU level and an improved cooperation
between Member States on issues of common interest and importance (climate
change, health, energy)?
 Which gaps and barriers can be distinguished with regards to the implementation of
the ERA?
 What is the distance to the envisaged objectives (2012 action points 79)?
Conclusion
 What are the non-European incurred costs, due to the incomplete implementation of
the ERA?
Recommendations
 What recommendations can be made based on the previous steps of the study?

1.3 Approach of the study and important conceptual warnings
The focus of this report is on the implementation of an integrated European Research
Area (ERA) from 2012 until now. The 2012 communication on ERA 80 sets four conditions
for success of ERA, in other words making progress from the 2012 situation to the full
implementation of ERA. These serve as targets in the estimation of the distance to target.
This in turn is used to calculate the cost of non-implementation of the ERA. For Condition
1, Member State reforms in all ERA priorities and the adoption of measures since 2012
were used81. For Condition 2, Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the
Communication by research stakeholders and the ERA compliance of Research
Performing Organisations (RPO) reported in the 2014 Progress Report were used as a
proxy. Condition 3, Increased support from the Commission to national ERA priorities
was assessed by using a self-assessment of DG Research and Innovation. Lastly,
Condition 4, Transparent monitoring was not taken into account as this only has an
indirect effect on the implementation of the ERA.
The study will first take stock; secondly, an assessment of the gaps and barriers leading to
a certain distance to target (which is full implementation of the ERA), based on country
studies and interviews with ERA stakeholders will be carried out. Thirdly, through taking
stock and an assessment exercise, the paper will demonstrate the distance at which the
ERA stands from the projected revenue. This ‘distance to target’ will be quantified using
the Commission´s impact assessment as a baseline. This impact assessment estimated that
the integration of the European research area could result in a gain of €16 billion annual
GDP from 2030 onwards82. The cost of non-Europe in the current study is the monetised
distance to this target. The research paper furthermore aims to clarify if the approach
proposed by the Commission is sufficient and which barriers or gaps in the ERA
infrastructure hinder synchronisation and therefore, the implementation of the ERA. The
Commission states in its 2014 report that Member States already started to take the
78 From the Member States' perspectives on various specific initiatives, such as construction costs of

research infrastructures, knowledge sharing (digital ERA), and easier access to research funds at EU
level.
79 European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership
for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
80
81

Identified in the 2014 Progress Report
Included in the ERA country fiches, part of the ERA Progress Report 2014

Impact Assessment report (SWD (2012) 212 final), accompanying the document European
Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for
Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
82

PE 581.382

58

European Research Area

necessary preparations towards implementing the ERA priorities. The assessment of these
actions by the Commission will be included in the analysis.
It should be clear that this is a simplified method of quantifying an area that is not
quantified easily. Evidently, there are many assumptions and considerations to be taken
into account when interpreting this figure (see annex). In order to better understand what
the quantification says and what it does not say, below are a number of many
shortcomings that have been reported:
Firstly, it needs to be noted that because the European Commission uses the concept of
the ERA completion, the quantification of the costs relates to the idea of the ERA as
something that can be completed and in relation to which a distance to target can be
provided. This being said, when it comes to further progress, we find that ERA should be
seen as an open-ended process, meaning that implementation is a continuous process not
reaching a final stage of completion as new challenges and barriers arise on the way.
Characterising ERA as an open-ended process, discredits the idea of a ‘distance to
target’, however, in this report thinking in terms of completion serves as a heuristic or
diagnostic tool, based on the Commission’s impact assessment, allowing stakeholders to
see room for improvement. Although, we still use the term ‘ERA implementation’, this in
fact should be seen as ‘the implementation of actions aimed at ERA progress’, following
the same line of reasoning.
Secondly, securing robust information to support decision-making has proven to be
difficult, as availability of data is problematic. This resulted in an unstable set of
indicators used for monitoring progress. In addition to the EU-level monitoring system,
only some countries also have national level monitoring systems, whereas, others have
none.
Thirdly, the quantification does not critically assess the result from the impact
assessment calculating the 16 billion euro annual benefit of ERA completion. It takes this
calculation as a given. However, there are no baselines set against which developments
can be monitored, nor targets set against which the progression can be tracked. The ERA
priorities and objectives are not translated in measurable targets for which indicators
are developed.
It remains questionable whether the envisaged actions 83 for stakeholders to take when
implementing the ERA were indeed the right ones to ‘complete’ the ERA and whether
other actions would have been more appropriate. For instance, ICF reports that Member
States criticize the current system for Progress Reports, as they are not able to recognise
the diversity of research systems and pathways towards achieving the ERA84. The
Progress Report 2014, acknowledges that there is not just one pathway for the ERA
completion: “There is no single path to achieve the ERA. The pace and level of the ERA
implementation very much depends on the national context and is fostered by targeted
policies at Member States level”85 For instance, ’effective research infrastructures’
involves the measure “to allocate funding through open calls for proposals, evaluated by
panels of leading independent domestic and non-domestic experts (peer review) - this
The term ’action’ refers to the reforms and actions defined by the European Commission in
2012, to be implemented by 2014 for each priority by the Member States, the Commission and the
research stakeholder organisations. Source: European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A
Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
84
ICF International (2015), Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and
Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation.
85
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The
Council And The European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014, p.7.

83

PE 581.382

59

Cost of Non-Europe Report

incites researchers to reach internationally-competitive levels of performance”. As such,
this is indeed recommendable, but the extent to which a MSs should apply project-based
funding depends on many variables, such as the extent to which this is already good
practice; whether the infrastructure is in place and whether the culture and mentality in
research performing and research funding organisations is in place to further develop
this. Increasing project-based funding can harm national research infrastructures,
especially in the newer Member States. For instance, a European Commission study point
towards higher administrative burdens86 and also the OECD, indicates that there are
important downsides to project-based funding87.
To assess the ERA implementation by research stakeholder organisation, it takes as a
reference the criticised 2014 progress report presenting survey results under a limited
number of research performing organisations. 88
Lastly, the quantification runs short in providing an overview on how countries
compare. This is not only presents a problem in this study, but runs throughout the entire
ERA implementation: ranking, benchmarking, positioning countries remains a very
challenging exercise, not the least hampered by the fact that countries might not share the
same objectives for the ERA implementation.

Methodology
This report is based upon desk research, EU level interviews and four country studies
(Austria, Czech Republic, Finland, Portugal). Additional methodological details of the
methodology and an overview of sources is included in the annex. As hard evidence in
this research area is limited at best, the different instruments mentioned above are
selected with an eye towards the triangulation of findings. Triangulation, simply put,
means that if different sources of information give an indication of a certain conclusion,
then this provides some sort of ´proof´. For the quantification of the distance to target a
simple analytical model was used to compare the current situation with the envisaged
situation as described in the 2012 Communication and Impact Assessment.
In order to make a selection of case studies as varied and relevant as possible, a
classification from the 2014 Progress Report89 was used to select countries. The
classification identifies 4 categories: 1) top-down ERA proactive, 2) bottom-up ERA
proactive, 3) limited implementation by stakeholders and 4) limited measures and
no/limited implementation. The reasoning behind this classification is that there is no
single path to the ERA: the implementation of the ERA is sometimes directly driven by
funders and RPOs (bottom up) and in some cases by national/regional policies (topdown). Taking into account the categories, as well as geographical range, we came to the
following selection of country studies:
-

Austria (top-down)

European Commission — Directorate-General for Research (2008), Diversified Funding streams
for University-based research: Impact of external project-based research funding on financial
management
in
Universities:
http://ec.europa.eu/invest-inresearch/pdf/download_en/external_funding_final_report.pdf
87
OECD (2011), OECD Innovation Policy Platform ISSUE BRIEF: PUBLIC SECTOR
RESEARCH FUNDING: www.oecd.org/innovation/policyplatform
88
See for a critical account on this survey: ERAC (ERAC 1201/14).ERAC Opinion on the
European Research Area Progress Report 2013. Brussels, 09-01-2014
89
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The
Council And The European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014
86

PE 581.382

60

European Research Area

-

Czech Republic (limited implementation by stakeholders)
Finland (bottom-up)
Portugal (limited measures and limited implementation)

2. The case studies consisted of desk research and semistructured interviews with experts from each country by
phone. State of play ERA implementation
Key messages




A key milestone in the development of the ERA is the 2012
Communication, in which the Commission establishes the need for a
reinforced ERA partnership between Member States, the Commission and
research stakeholder organisations. Five ERA priorities were defined by the
Commission: more effective national research systems; optimal
transnational co-operation and; an open labour market for researchers;
gender equality and gender mainstreaming in research; optimal circulation,
access to and transfer of scientific knowledge (including via digital ERA).
In December 2014, the Council of the European Union acknowledged that
there was good progress and that the conditions for the ERA were now in
place. However, the Progress Reports (2013 and 2014) were not able to
show an overall ranking of countries on the implementation of the ERA. As
the Member States have different systems and pace, the road towards the
ERA differs. In May 2015, the Council of the European Union endorsed the
ERA Roadmap 2015-2020. The ERA Roadmap identifies top priority actions
and explicitly recognises the different characteristics of national research
and innovation systems across Europe.

This chapter presents the state of play of the implementation of the ERA, and provides an
overview of the most prominent milestones up until now.

2.1 Background of the introduction of the European Research
Area
This section briefly explains the ERA history, focussing on three milestones:




The first introduction of the ERA in 2000
The formal uptake of the ERA in the Lisbon Treaty in 2007
The reinforcement of the ERA partnership in 2012.

First introduction of ERA
The value of an integrated European research system has long been recognised at EU
policy level. This paragraph highlights some of the impetuses that lie at the basis of the
ERA. In 2000, the ERA was introduced to support the Lisbon Agenda, that contained the

PE 581.382

61

Cost of Non-Europe Report

EU’s strategic economic development goals. Research policy was then established as a
shared competence between the European Commission and the Member States. 90
At that time, the research excellence of the EU was acknowledged in comparison to the
global context thereof. Europe produced a third of the world's scientific knowledge. It
was in the forefront in areas, such as medical research and chemistry and it had notable
success stories in technology, in sectors, such as aeronautics and telecommunications 91.
Despite this research excellence, in 2000 it was recognised that this research excellence
was being spread too thin and that the European research system showed some very
worrisome flaws:
Negative view of the European Research system in 2000:
 The average research effort in the Union (the differences being significant from one
country to another) was only 1.8% of Europe’s GDP, in comparison to 2.8% in the
United States and 2.9% in Japan. The difference between total public and private
expenditure on research in the US and Europe amounted to some €60 billion in 1998,
in comparison to 12 billion in 1992.
 In terms of employment, researchers accounted for only 2.5 in every thousand (2,5‰)
members of the industrial workforce in Europe, in comparison to 6.7‰ in the United
States and 6‰ in Japan.
 The trade balance in high tech products has shown a deficit of €20 billion per year in
Europe over the ten years prior to 2000, and this deficit seemed to be increasing.
 The number of degree-level European students in the United States was twice as high
as the number of American students at that level in Europe, and 50% of Europeans
studying for a doctorate in the United States stayed there for longer periods of time
and some never left.
 However, research and technology accounted for 25 to 50% of economic growth and
had a strong influence on competitiveness and employment and the quality of life of
Europeans.
 If technological progress creates the jobs of tomorrow, it is research that creates the
jobs of the day after tomorrow. The trends in research could therefore, have a
negative influence on the development of employment in Europe in the years ahead.92

Formal uptake of ERA in the Lisbon Treaty
In 2007, the European Research Area (ERA) was formally taken up in the Treaty of Lisbon
with the objective of resulting in a: “unified research area open to the world, based on the
Internal Market, in which researchers, scientific knowledge and technology circulate freely and
through which the Union and its Member States strengthen their scientific and technological
bases, their competitiveness and their capacity to collectively address grand challenges”.93

90

Artile 182.5 of the Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, cited in ICF International (2015). Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member
States and Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation.
91
Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic
and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions of 18 January 2000: Towards a European
research area [COM(2000) 6 final - Not published in the Official Journal].
92
Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic
and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions of 18 January 2000: Towards a European
research area [COM(2000) 6 final - Not published in the Official Journal], p. 4-5.
93
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The
Council And The European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014

PE 581.382

62

European Research Area

The role of research for economic growth and innovation, and the urge for Europe to
reinforce it research efforts were thus acknowledged. The main instrument the European
Commission used to this end was the Framework Programme, the European Union’s
Research and innovation programme until 2013 (followed by the Horizon 2020 starting
2014).
A reinforced partnership
The more structured implementation of the ERA commenced in 2012 with the Impact
Assessment and the Communication on the ERA partnership 94. In 2012, five ERA
priorities were defined by the Commission:
•
•

•
•
•

More effective national research systems – including increased competition within
national borders and sustained or greater investment in research
Optimal transnational co-operation and competition - defining and implementing
common research agendas on grand-challenges, raising quality through Europe-wide
open competition, and constructing and running effectively key research
infrastructures on a pan-European basis
An open labour market for researchers - to ensure the removal of barriers to
researcher mobility, training and attractive careers
Gender equality and gender mainstreaming in research – to end the waste of talent
and to diversify views and approaches in research and foster excellence
Optimal circulation, access to and transfer of scientific knowledge including via
digital ERA - to guarantee access to and uptake of knowledge by all.

In order to give a boost to the ERA completion in relation to the five ERA priorities, the
key message of the 2012 Communication95 was the establishment of “a reinforced ERA
partnership - deeper, wider and more efficient than to date - between Member States, the
Commission and research stakeholder organisations96. This means complementing the primary
ERA partnership between the Member States and the Commission by systematically involving
stakeholder organisations, such as Science Europe (which brings together research funding and
performing organisations) where appropriate”. In other words, the Commission identified a
new and important role for research stakeholder organisations.
Therefore, following this new reinforced ERA partnership, there are three groups of
stakeholders within the ERA to be identified:
-

European Commission
Member States
Research stakeholder organisations

The relationships between the European Commission, national governments and research
stakeholder organisations are not hierarchical; each stakeholder has its own particular
position and relationship with the other two stakeholders. This is illustrated by the
following schematic overview:

94

European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final A Reinforced European Research Area
Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
95
European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area
Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
96
Federative and representative bodies of public and private research actors (including researchers,
universities, funding and performing organisations) and their members.

PE 581.382

63

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Figure 1 Overview roles and relationships key stakeholders

Key role

Relationship others

1) European
Commission (EC)

Coordinating ERA
implementation;
European funding
schemes

2) National
Government
(NG)

Develop national
policies

3) Research
stakeholder
organisations
(RSOs)

Governing
national funding
schemes;
conducting
research

NG: EC encourages NG to take action
RSO: by designing the funding
schemes, RSOs more and more comply
with ERA principles

EC: informing European policy makers;
responding to invitations and
communications.
RSO: setting the legal rules and
requirements for research funding and
performance:

EC: complying with EC funding schemes;
informing European policymakers.
NG: implementing national policy
changes; informing national
policymakers.

Source: authors
In its 2012 Communication, the Commission identified accompanying communication
actions for each of the three groups. These are reforms and actions [that were] to be
implemented by 2014 for each priority, specified for each stakeholder 97. Moreover, in the
Progress Report 2014, it is concluded that “it is now up to Member States and research
stakeholders to implement the necessary ERA reforms and make ERA work”. Therefore, the
focus from 2012 onwards is on the Member States and RSOs, whereas the Commission
fulfils a supporting role.
In order to improve the cooperation between the three main stakeholder groups and
further support the ERA implementation, two bodies were established.
-

The ERA Stakeholder Platform was set up to follow-up on the implementation of the
undertakings and offer key stakeholders (Conference of European Schools for
Advanced Engineering Education and Research (CESAER), European Association of
Research and Technology Organisations (EARTO), European University Association
(EUA), League of European Research Universities (LERU), Nordforsk and Science
Europe) a forum for discussion for the development of the ERA policy. The
Stakeholder Platform offers a forum for discussion where Stakeholder Organisations

Eg. in relation to priority 1, amongst others, Member States are invited to ”Ensure that all public
bodies responsible for allocating research funds apply the core principles of international peer
review. The Commission will ”support mutual learning and the exchange of good practice between
Member States on the removal of national legal and other barriers to ERA (...)”.
97

PE 581.382

64

European Research Area

interact, not only with the Commission but also amongst themselves, in order to find
partnerships and enable consensus building.98 The ERA Stakeholders Platform is a
means for direct contact between the research stakeholder organisations and the
Commission. It is appreciated by stakeholders.
In most countries, there is also a stakeholders’ platform organised at national level.
-

Another actor that should be mentioned is the European Research Area and
Innovation Committee (ERAC). ERAC members are the European Commission and
Member States of the European Union and ERAC is chaired by the European
Commission. The Vice-Chair is elected among Member States.99 ERAC is a strategic
policy advisory committee that provides strategic input from European
Commission and Member State experts to the Council of the European Union, the
Commission and Member States on research and innovation issues that are relevant
to the development of the European Research Area, the European Semester and the
Europe 2020 flagship initiative Innovation Union. The Secretariat of the Committee is
provided by the General Secretariat of the Council.100

The ERA is at the heart of the Europe 2020 strategy and its Innovation Union policy
flagship. In the 2012 Communication, the European Commission stated that the ERA
should be completed by 2014101.

2.2 State of play of implementation in four countries
Selection of countries
In order to make a selection of case studies that are as varied and relevant as possible, the
following classification from the 2014 Progress Report was used to select countries:
Figure 2 Classification of countries according to ERA policies and implementation of
the ERA Actions

Source: Directorate-General for Research & Innovation
In the Progress Report 2014, it is stated that the results of the classification (see figure A2
in the annex) imply that there is no single path to the ERA: the implementation of the
ERA above the EU average is sometimes directly driven by funders and RPOs (bottomup) and in some cases by national/regional policies (top-down).
98

http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/partnership_en.htm
http://era.gv.at/directory/89
100
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/partnership_en.htm
99

101 European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership

for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012

PE 581.382

65

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Taking into account the categories, as well as geographical range, we came to the
following selection of country studies:
-

Austria (top-down)
Czech Republic (limited implementation by stakeholders)
Finland (bottom-up)
Portugal (limited measures and limited implementation)

For a more detailed description of the methodology, please refer to the Annex of this
report.

State of play
The table below presents a selection of initiatives and scores related to the three relevant
priorities in this report. As such, the table provides an overview of the state of play in
each country. However, the value of these indicators, in terms of determining progress, is
limited102. The subsequent texts serve as an illustration of the developments, and are
based on the conducted interviews for each country.
Figure 3 : highlights state of play for relevant priorities
Priority 1 The
Priority 2 The realisation
establishment of more
of optimal transnational
effective national research
co-operation and
systems
competition
Austria

GBOARD: € 294 per
inhabitant in 2012 (1,6%
of total government
expenditures) (EU
average: € 179 per
inhabitant). The growth
rate of the total
GBOARD has been
higher in Austria than
in the EU as a whole.
Share of responding
funders’ total buget
allocated as project
based funding: 49%
(compared to 66,2% EU
level)

Transnational and
international priorities
are included ‘Becoming
an Innovation Leader:
Realising Potentials,
Increasing Dynamics,
Creating the Future’,
the Federal
Government strategy
for research,
technology and
innovation.
Share of responding
funders’total budget
allocated to
transnationally
coordinated R&D: 2,1%
(EU average: 4,1%).
Joint programming
initatives: participation
in 8 out of 10 ongoing
initiatives (coordinating
1).

Priority 5 The realisation of
optimal circulation and access
to and transfer of scientific
knowledge including via
digital ERA.
Open access has been a
priority in Austria, eg in
the frame of performance
agreements with
universities and the ‘Open
Access Network Austria’,
that coordinates open
access activities and makes
recommendations.
At the same time, the share
of research-performing
organisations making
available online and free
of charge publicly-funded
scientific research data
systematically in the ERAcompliant cluster in
Austria is lower than
within the EU ERA
compliant cluster.

102 See also the Briefing Paper on the Monitoring Mechanisms of the Integrated European Research

Area drafted by Panteia for the European Parliament simultaneously to this report.

PE 581.382

66

European Research Area

Austria was involved in
5 Article 185 initiatives
(programmes
undertaken jointly by
several MS) and
furthermore
participated in 87 ERANETs103 (22 still
running).
Czech
Republic

GBOARD: € 99 per
inhabitant in 2012 (1,5%
of total government
expenditures) (EU
average: € 179 per
inhabitant). The growth
rate of the total
GBOARD has been
higher in Czech
Republic than in the EU
as a whole.
Share of responding
funders’ total buget
allocated as project
based funding: 53,2%
(compared to 66,2% EU
level)

Finland

GBOARD: € 382 per
inhabitant in 2012 (1,9%
of total government
expenditures) (EU
average: € 179 per
inhabitant)
Share of responding
funders’ total budget
allocated as project
based funding: 91,5%
(compared to 66,2% EU
level)

The share of responding
funders’ total budget
allocated to
transnationally
coordinated R&D is
lower than the EU
average (1,8 compared
to 4,1 at the EU level).
The Czech Republic
participates in 5 out of
10 ongoing initiatives, is
involved in 2 Article
185 initiatives
(programmes
undertaken jointly by
several MS) and finally
has participated in 28
ERA-NETs, 4 still
running.
No overarching
legislation governing
Finland’s participation
in joint initiatives.
Share of responding
funders’ total budget
allocated to
transnationally
coordinated R&D: 6,9%
(EU average: 4,1%).
Finland participates in 9
out of 10 ongoing joint
programming
initiatives, and
coordinates one.
Finland was involved in
5 Article 185 initiatives

There are no specific
obligatory measures in
place at the national level
related to open access to
publications or data.
The share of researchperforming organisations
making available online
and free of charge
publicly-funded scientific
research data
systematically in the ERAcompliant cluster in Czech
Republic is lower than
within the EU ERA
compliant cluster.

Open Science and
Research Project 2014-2017
launched by the Ministry
of Education and Culture
(however no overall
legislative or policy
provision supporting open
access to scientific
publications and data).
The share of researchperforming organisations
making available online
and free of charge
publicly-funded scientific
research data
systematically in the ERAcompliant cluster in
Finland is higher than
within the EU ERA

103 The ERA-NET instrument under Horizon 2020 is designed to support public-public partnerships

in their preparation, establishment of networking structures, design, implementation and
coordination of joint activities as well as topping up of single joint calls and of actions of a
transnational nature. Source: http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/era-net-in-horizon-2020_en.html

PE 581.382

67

Cost of Non-Europe Report

(programmes
undertaken jointly by
several MS) and
participated in 77 ERANETs (18 still running).

Portugal

GBOARD: € 148 per
inhabitant in 2012 (2%
of total government
expenditures) (EU
average: € 179 per
inhabitant)

Share of responding
funders’ total budget
allocated to
transnationally
coordinated R&D: 6,3%
(EU average: 4,1%).

Share of responding
funders’ total budget
allocated as project
based funding: 79,7%
(compared to 66,2% EU
level)

Joint programming
initiatives: participation
in 4 out of 10 ongoing
initiatives.
Portugal was involved
in 5 Article 185
initiatives
(programmes
undertaken jointly by
several MS) under FP6
and & and in four
existing initiatives, and
furthermore
participated in 59 ERANETs (29 still running).

Source: Authors, on the basis of country fiches 2014, available:
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/eraprogress_en.htm

PE 581.382

68

compliant cluster.
Regarding open innovation
and knowledge transfer
between public and private
sectors, Finland has
adopted several measures
to support public-private
linkages. One of the key
instruments has been the
Strategic Centres for
Science, Technology and
Innovation (SHOKs). A
2013 internal evaluation
indicated that progress
could have been faster and
that SHOKs should become
more strategic.
Within the ERA-compliant
cluster in Portugal, the
share of publicly funded
scientific publications in
open access amongst
research-performing
organisations is higher
than that within the EU’s
ERA compliant cluster.
The share of researchperforming organisations
making available online
and free of charge
publicly-funded scientific
research data
systematically in the ERAcompliant cluster in
Portugal is higher than
within the EU ERA
compliant cluster.
Portugal has not developed
a knowledge transfer
strategy but GAIN (Global
Innovation Acceleration
Network) is a relevant
initiative that is under
preparation and aims at
providing a national
structure for technology
transfer.

European Research Area

In order to have a better understanding of how countries individually deal with the ERA
implementation, we provide a number of illustrations below, based on the interviews for
each Member State.
Austria aims to become an innovation leader and uses the ERA as a tool to improve
national competitiveness, make the ERA instrumental for its own objectives and aims to
embed the ERA within all R&D activities. The overall research innovation strategy 104
serves as an umbrella. In addition, an EU action plan was developed (which covers not
only the ERA, but also Horizon 2020 and other programmes). The country wants to push
forward an agenda for cultural change and has established knowledge transfer centres (to
enhance business-science cooperation).
The Czech Republic has an ERA Committee, which is an advisory body to the Ministry of
Education, consisting of representatives of universities, academies of sciences, and other
ministries, etc.), with the aim of informing and consulting the wider research community.
The research community in the Czech Republic is quite fragmented. Though no
supporting evidence has been found in relevant documentation, according to one
interviewee, the biggest barrier is the lack of communication, trust and cooperation
between the research community and the policymakers. There is caution amongst the
different types of organisations within the research community, which in turn leads to
suspicion between the research community and other actors, such as the government. In
addition, universities are relatively independent and do not always have an interest in
changing The government produces measures and strategies, but the implementation by
RSOs is at a halt.
For Finland, the ERA is useful as it opens up a dialogue between MS105. The current
dialogue supported by the EC is working well. Most helpful are the peer review reports
on Member States. These provide the opportunity to look across borders and to see how
other MS deal with similar issues (there have only been 5 or 6 reviews completed). The
Progress Reports provide information on what has changed in Member States and
provide the opportunity to align the Member States. This does not always do justice to
reality, but it is an invitation to learn more and to study more in depth what the situation
in the country is and offers the possibility to ask questions.
Over the last few years in Portugal, there has been an increased focus on participation in
scientific infrastructures and attracting foreign experienced scholars to the country.
Budgetary constraints negatively affect the involvement and commitment needed to
implement the ERA106. There has been a stronger emphasis on gaining other sources of
financing, including Horizon 2020. In addition to funding, the coordination between the
different stakeholders is also mentioned as a challenge. Portugal does not have a national
ERA council. The main body is the Science and Technology Council (which supports and
provides advice to the Foundation for Science and Technology, the national funding
agency). The National Innovation Agency (ANI) (under responsibility of the Ministry of
Economy and the Ministry of Education and Science), is a platform that contributes
towards increasing alignment of R&D policies.

104

Republik Österreich (2011), Realising potentials, increasing dynamics, creating the future:
Becoming an Innovation Leader.
105
Source: interviews
106
Source: interviews

PE 581.382

69

Cost of Non-Europe Report

2.3 Success rates Horizon 2020
As the Member States have different systems and pace in the ERA implementation, it
remains very difficult to provide a general ranking of countries’ performance. Even the
Progress Report 2014 does not provide an overall ranking of countries on the
implementation of the ERA (see briefing paper on monitoring). The success rate for
Horizon 2020 can be used as an indicator to assess the ERA implementation of countries,
as the Horizon 2020 funding schemes demand ERA compliant research structures from its
applicants (eg. transnational cooperation).
In total, 31,115 full proposals were submitted and these eligible proposals requested a
total EU financial contribution of €80.3 billion. In total, 3,200 proposals have been
awarded and supported with a total of €5.5 billion in EU funding. Taking all applications
from all Member States into account, the overall success rate is approximately 16%.
Figure 4 Success rates for applications to Horizon 2020 per EU Member State

Source: European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2015). Horizon
2020: first results.
Figure 3 presents a ranking of the 28 Member States, and shows that countries’ success
rates vary considerably: from a success rate of 11% at the bottom (Bulgaria) to more than
17% (France and Belgium). As mentioned, the figures presented in the graph primarily
show that some countries are more successful in obtaining Horizon 2020 funds than
others. It was noted that the success rates for the Seventh Framework Programme for
Research (FP7) was around 20%. For Horizon 2020 there were fewer funds available in the
first year, compared to the last year of the Framework Programme 7 (FP7). Moreover,
there was an increased interest by applicants (due to efforts on accessibility and
attractiveness)107.
The success rates do not directly relate to the funding distribution in Horizon 2020. The
following figure provides an overview of the Horizon 2020 funding distribution and FP7.

107

European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2015). Horizon 2020:
first results.

PE 581.382

70

European Research Area

Figure 5 Share of EU financial contribution to participants in signed grant agreements:
Horizon 2020 compared with FP7

Source: European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2015). Horizon
2020: first results.
The main receivers of Horizon 2020 funding are Germany, UK, France, Spain, Italy and
the Netherlands, receiving in total more than 70% of the total budget. The EU financial
contribution received is dependent on many factors, including the size of the selected
project, the roles of national organisations in the project and the differing local costs
associated with participating.108

2.4 Progression and need for further action: ERA Roadmap 20152020
The 2014 Progress Report provides an overview of the progress made in the ERA
priorities in all EU Member States and some Associated Countries. The 2014 Progress
Report states that completion of the ERA depends upon four conditions:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Member State reforms in all ERA priorities;
Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the Communication by
research stakeholders;
Increased support from the Commission to national ERA policies;
Transparent monitoring (EMM)109.

In its conclusions of 5 December 2014, the Council of the European Union “Acknowledges
that the ERA partnership has made good progress in delivering ERA and that the conditions for
implementing a well-functioning ERA, set out in the Communication on a reinforced European
Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth, are now in place. Although much has
already been achieved, further efforts of the Commission, Member States and research stakeholders
are needed to make the ERA fully operational, whilst recognising that the full completion of the
ERA is a long term process and the paths, depending on the national contexts, can differ among
Member States” 110. In other words, the stakeholders have the means to implement the ERA

108

European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2015). Horizon 2020:
first results.
109
The ERA monitoring mechanism (EMM) was developed with the aim of assessing progress in
the implementation of ERA at three levels: national and regional policies, funders and researchperforming organisations (RPOs). In the briefing paper by Panteia “Monitoring Mechanisms of an
integrated European Research Area”, the EMM is further described and reflected upon.
110
Council of the European Union (2014). European Research Area Progress Report 2014 –
Competitiveness Council Meeting. Brussels, 05.12.2014, p. 2.

PE 581.382

71

Cost of Non-Europe Report

(in the sense that the actions defined in 2012 have been taken), but further actions have to
be taken to fully implement the ERA and make it operational.
On May 19th, 2015 the Council of the European Union endorsed the ERA Roadmap 20152020111, adopted by the European Research Area and Innovation Committee (ERAC). The
purpose of the Roadmap is to identify a limited number of key implementation priorities
which are likely to have the largest impact on Europe’s science, research and innovation
systems if all the members of the ERA partnership get them right.
The ERA Roadmap explicitly recognises the different characteristics of national research
and innovation systems across Europe and does not seek to prescribe actions to be
implemented in a particular manner by every Member State, but rather, it points towards
actions that are likely to have the largest impact and proposes actions that might be taken
to implement these priorities (whilst acknowledging that these do not necessarily
represent a priority for all Member States). This Roadmap identifies ‘top action priorities’
at national and European levels for each ERA priority. It furthermore, recognises a
leading role for Member States, as well as their full autonomy in selecting the most
appropriate approaches when it comes to implementing these actions. The table on the
next page gives an overview of the main actions for the priorities that are relevant for this
report112.
The next step is the translation of the ERA Roadmap into national roadmaps. The
deadline set for this is May 2016. With the Roadmap, the Member States are in the lead to
define action plans according to national priorities (objectives, actions, priorities, targets,
deadlines). Finally, it should be mentioned that the Roadmap is a living document, to be
kept under review, as research and innovation continue to rapidly evolve.

111 Council of the European Union (2015). Draft Council conclusions on the European Research Area

Roadmap 2015-2020 – Adoption. Brussels, 19.05.2015. (8975/15).

112 For the full overview, see Council of the European Union (2015). Draft Council conclusions on

the European Research Area Roadmap 2015-2020 – Adoption. Brussels, 19.05.2015. (8975/15).

PE 581.382

72

European Research Area

Figure 6 Top priority actions described in the ERA Roadmap 2015-2020
1 - EFFECTIVE
2(A) - JOINTLY
2(B) - MAKE OPTIMAL
NATIONAL RESEARCH
ADDRESSING GRAND
USE OF PUBLIC
SYSTEMS
CHALLENGES
INVESTMENTS IN
RESEARCH
INFRASTRUCTURES

National
level

Member States should
promote better alignment of
national and European
policies, with the goal of
making optimal use of public
investments in research and
innovation.

European
level

The European Commission
should develop the planned
Partnership Instrument (Policy
Support Facility) taking into
account existing tools such as
OECD Innovation Policy
Platform.

PE 581.382

Member States and
Associated Countries should
ensure that relevant ministries
and Research Funding
Organisations (RFOs) work
more closely together so that
national strategies are better
aligned with the themes and
priorities of the Scientific
Research and Innovations
Agendas (SRIAs) of the JPIs.
The Commission and Member
States should work together to
clarify the division of labour
between the EU, Member
States and transnational levels
- including through the
development of Horizon 2020
work programmes.

Member States and
Associated Countries should
ensure that the ESFRI
roadmap and their national
RIs roadmaps are compatible
with each other.

The use of the European
Structural and Investment
Funds for these purposes
should wherever possible be
encouraged.

73

5 – OPTIMAL
CIRCULATION AND
TRANSFER OF
SCIENTIFIC
KNOWLEDGE
Fully implementing
knowledge transfer policies at
national level
Member States/Associated
Countries should promote
effective knowledge transfer
mechanisms in their RPOs
with suitable supporting
measures to encourage this.

The Intellectual Property
Recommendation and Code of
Practice should be reviewed.

5 – OPTIMAL
CIRCULATION AND
TRANSFER OF
SCIENTIFIC
KNOWLEDGE
Promoting Open access to
scientific publications
At National level Member
States and Associated
Countries should promote
Gold and/or Green Open
Access in line with the
Commission’s 2012
Recommendation on access to
and preservation of scientific
information (covering both
scientific publications and
research data).
The European Commission
should continue to contribute
to open access by including
appropriate incentives in the
rules, standards and priorities
of Horizon 2020, including in
the Model Grant Agreements.

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Authorities should raise the
There should be a careful
The European Commission
profile of transnational
examination of the planned
and Member States could
cooperation initiatives
financial contributions, both
consider adopting an Open
(including macro-regional
to proposed new ESFRI
Science approach on selected
initiatives, inter-governmental projects and to existing ones,
common societal challenges
organisations, such as COST
in order to ensure their
under Horizon 2020.
and EUREKA!, JPIs etc.) with sustainability.
all relevant actors (including
regional ones) and seek to
raise their participation.
Source: authors, on the basis of Council of the European Union (2015). Draft Council conclusions on the European Research Area Roadmap 2015-2020 – Adoption. Brussels,
19.05.2015. (8975/15).
National
and
European
level
actions

PE 581.382

74

European Research Area

3. Assessment of ERA implementation: gaps and barriers

Key messages









The ERA should be seen as an open-ended process, meaning that
implementation is a continuous process not reaching a final stage of
completion as new challenges and barriers arise on the way. This implies
that the completion of the ERA is impossible. It may well explain the
difficulties that have arisen while trying to define indictors and set targets.
As success of the ERA remains undefined, assessing the level of
implementation is difficult. Yet, stakeholders consider the following to be
benefits of the ERA: it opens a dialogue and provides an opportunity for
knowledge exchange; it creates possibilities for cooperation across borders;
for less developed countries, it helps in mainstreaming research into policy
and towards adopting policy lines. The Policy Support Facility is very
important in this respect and is expected by the stakeholders, to have
beneficial effects on using funding optimally as this initiative creates
possibilities for mutual learning.
A strong criticism, acknowledged in the ERA Roadmap, is that there has
been too little room for heterogeneity:
 Differences in the ERA benefits can create a disincentive to continue
 Actions and priorities that are too much ‘one size fits all’
 Becoming a uniform research area, shouldn’t be the aim and is not
beneficial. With the Roadmap, different perspectives on the ERA
gain more space.
The insufficient funds related to a relative political priority to implement
ERA actions, creates a barrier in implementation and therefore, hampers the
expected benefits.
The research innovation policies are too fragmented. There still is a lack of
coordination. Coordinated efforts may lead to effective cost sharing and
prevent fragmentation and duplication of efforts.

This chapter aims to give an assessment of dynamics regarding the level of
implementation for the three types of stakeholders: Member States, research stakeholder
organisations and the European Commission. The key roles have already been mentioned
in chapter 2 (figure 1), this chapter goes in to further detail on the views and level of
implementation of these stakeholders. This chapter is based on desk research and
interviews with stakeholders. Both European level stakeholders and stakeholders in four
Member States (Austria, Czech Republic, Finland and Portugal) were interviewed.
On the basis of this, the gaps in and barriers for implementation will be discussed in more
detail, while taking the three types of stakeholders mentioned in the final section of this
chapter, into consideration. It is important to note that the statements made in this
chapter are largely based upon the interviews conducted with several stakeholders, and
therefore, can be considered a collection of issues mentioned and experienced by
stakeholders, rather than research results based upon solid empirical evidence.

PE 581.382

75

Cost of Non-Europe Report

3.1 Reflections on the role of Member States governments in the
ERA implementation
National governments are the main stakeholders for the implementation of the ERA. In
the 2012 Communication, the Member State governments were recommended to take a
number of actions113 related to the five priorities for ERA implementation. These
principally concern removing legal and other barriers, such as for instance those
regarding cross-border access to research infrastructures. Based on an assessment of the
country fiches that accompany the 2014 Progress Report, we can conclude that a majority
of countries took measures in relation to the priorities.114
The level of implementation in a country depends on many factors, such as the
fragmentation of the research area within the country; trust and level of cooperation
between key stakeholders; the political will, financial allocations to R&D, arrangements
for ERA implementation infrastructures (such as a national ERA Council). In addition,
there are a number of issues at national government level in relation to the ERA
implementation:
-

-

There are important disparities between countries on the importance of the ERA and
these differences between the countries do not provide an incentive for Member
States to act towards speeding up further ERA implementation. Several interviewees
are under the impression that some Member States’ governments no longer consider
the ERA a priority. Some countries are so far behind, that respondents have their
doubts whether they will ever catch up. This is considered to be very demotivating in
the context of additional efforts. In relation to this, Member States do not always see
the benefits for themselves in creating an internal market. The ERA priorities do not
necessarily coincide with the national priorities and objectives. No further evidence
has been found in the relevant documentation to support these views expressed
during the interviews.
An obstacle for implementation of the ERA is lack of investments115. Short-term
issues are considered to win the battle for budget from a long-term public investment
area, such as research, both at national and EU levels. The figure below shows the
differences between Member States in terms of R&D expenditure. It also shows that
overall R&D expenditure in the EU-28 increased in the 2003-2013 period, with a dip
between 2004 and 2007, but is still well below the US and Japan.

113 Eg, Member States were invited to remove legal and other barriers to the application of open,

transparent and merit based recruitment of researchers (in relation to priority 3). The term ’action’
refers to the reforms and actions defined by the European Commission in 2012, to be implemented
by 2014 for each priority by the Member States, the Commission and the research stakeholder
organisations. Source: European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European
Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
114
115

Chapter 4 and the annex provide more details on this exercise.
Source: interviews

PE 581.382

76

European Research Area

Figure
GDP)

7:

Gross

domestic

expenditure

on

R&D,

2003–2013

(%

of

Source: Eurostat

3.2 Reflections on the role of Research stakeholder
organisations in the ERA implementation
In the 2012 Communication, the research stakeholder organisations were recommended
to take a number of actions116, in order to implement the ERA priorities and for instance,
to agree on common funding principles.
The Progress Reports include survey data of Research Funding and Research Performing
Organisations. The 2014 Progress Report concludes that 81% of the institutions are ERA
compliant and 17% has limited compliance. The ERA is not applicable for the remaining
2%. It furthermore, shows for instance, that outputs (in terms of share of publications and
share of patents) by RPOs in the ERA compliant cluster, are a lot higher than the share of
those RPOs that are not ERA compliant. 117
116

Eg. research stakeholder organisations were invited to agree on common funding principles eligible costs, reporting requirements, etc. to make national research programmes compatible,
interoperable (cross-border) and simpler for researchers, with regards to priority 2.
117
It should be noted that the voluntary nature of the RPO surveys, on which the 2014 Progress
Report results are based, are problematic with regard to the results. Results were not representative
and therefore, presented only an indication of the situation of those institutions which responded to
the survey. Moreover, it was unclear at what level to respond (some targeted organisations were

PE 581.382

77

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Some EU level organisations representing the research stakeholder organisations note
that the actions defined in the 2012 Communication are not necessarily those actions that
research stakeholder organisations aim to achieve: some RSOs have different
perspectives on what the ERA is and what is needed to achieve it. Moreover, the goal of
integration in their eyes does not reflect the aim of achieving better science. Science
Europe concludes that the current approach for priority 1 (more effective national
research systems) does not necessarily help policymakers and RSOs to identify issues that
matter in research policy. For example, in its position paper, Science Europe concludes
that identifying project-based funding as the most important way to induce competition
in research may prove counter-productive in some contexts, as it might cause researchers
to spend a significant amount of their time writing or reviewing research proposals
instead of doing research. 118
Some RSOs at national level indicate that there are differences at national level between
how the national government and the research stakeholders would like to implement the
ERA. This sometimes concerns differences in the pace at which changes are suggested,
but can also relate to more fundamental differences of opinions of what would work best
for the research community within the country. In the case of the Czech Republic for
instance, the RSO’s are relatively influential and have vested interests that do not always
coincide with the ERA. Setting up effective coordination between different stakeholders
can be a barrier (both within governments and between government and nongovernmental organisations)119.

3.3 Reflections on the role of the European Commission in the
ERA implementation
In the 2012 Communication, the Commission defined a number of actions, in order to
support the other stakeholders in completing the ERA by 2014. An example is the Support
through the Smart Specialisation Platform Member States and regions in using Structural
Funds to develop research capacity and smart specialisation strategies.120
Based on a self-assessment completed in the summer of 2015, the European Commission
indicated that more than 80% of the actions have been taken. This was done by assigning
3 categories and levels of implementation to each action: not started (0%), ongoing
process (75%), completed (100%). Naturally, a self-assessment has its limitations.
Moreover, using only three categories and assigning 75% completion to actions is a
simplification, which in some cases does not do justice to complex realities. In addition,
the relative importance of actions is not taken into consideration.
The stakeholders that have been interviewed for this study generally have a positive
view on the role of the Commission and appreciate the work done to push the ERA
umbrella organisations, which implies they should speak on behalf of their members who were also
consulted).
118
Science Europe (2014). Science Europe Position Statement on Priority One of the 2012 ERA
Communication: More Effective National Research Systems.
119
Source: interviews
120
The Smart Specialisation Platform was established by the European Commission to provide
professional advice to EU countries and regions for the design of their research and innovation
strategies for smart specialisation (RIS3). Services include: providing guidance material and good
practice examples; organising information sessions for policymakers and participating in
conferences; providing training to policymakers; facilitating peer-reviews, supporting access to
relevant data; participating in high quality research projects to inform strategy formation and policy
making. See http://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/activities for further information.

PE 581.382

78

European Research Area

agenda. However, the different interpretation of the ERA in the Member States, research
stakeholder organisations and the Commission seems challenging (see previous sections).
Horizon2020 is the main vehicle for the EC, however, some note that the EC does not
actively promote Horizon2020 as a tool for the ERA. In addition to the financial incentive,
the EU provides a forum to exchange knowledge and experiences. Improvements can be
made towards the better exchange of information. Reports (such as the national progress
reports) could be used more effectively. Currently, these are not considered to be ‘owned’
by the MS. For countries that are lagging behind, it would be beneficial if the EC would
give more policy support, for instance in the form of recommendations. The ERA is an
opportunity to provide reviews, policy support, advice and could be used more
frequently by the EC. A good example of policy support is the recently (March 2015)
launched Policy Support Facility, an instrument to give EU Member State governments
practical support to identify, implement and evaluate those reforms needed to enhance
the quality of their public funding. It includes peer reviewing and provides access to
independent high level expertise and analysis. It is funded under Horizon 2020, the EU
research and innovation programme.121
A barrier mentioned in the interviews, is that the research innovation policies are too
fragmented. There is still a lack of coordination that could be addressed at EU level.
Establishing closer links between the national and EU R&D policy would be beneficial
(particularly the coordination of national R&D programmes that emerge under the
umbrella of Joint Programming Initiatives or ERA-NETS) for instance, in involving the
Czech R&D system more within the ERA. In other words, coordinated efforts may lead to
effective cost sharing and prevent fragmentation and duplication of efforts.
The IA and EC communications are quite detailed and are a product of their time. In that
respect, it reflects what was considered to be important at ‘that moment’, instead of
providing a framework in which the stakeholders can work for a longer period of time.
Currently, a more macro-birds-eye perspective is chosen to communicate what ERA is
within the Roadmap. According to some stakeholders, this is much more effective in
recognizing the value of diversity. Having a more bird’s-eye view may be more difficult
to steer, yet it is likely to be more effective and relevant to countries in their specific
context.

3.4 Gaps and barriers
This section discusses the main gaps and barriers mentioned in the sections above, in
more detail. We start with the observation that it remains unclear what a completed ERA
entails. Indicators, targets and monitoring reports are much debated 122. This becomes
logical if one considers the ERA as an open-ended process rather than an ‘end-state’ that
can be reached (meaning that implementation is a continuous process not reaching a final
stage of completion as new challenges and barriers arise on the way). Characterising the
ERA as an open-ended process is in line with expert views on the matter. 123 This
characterisation also helps to further understand the findings from available literature. To
avoid any misunderstanding: this finding does not disqualify the value of the ERA
actions or the indicators specifically linked to such actions. It does however, imply that
setting targets for the ERA as a whole, and quantifying the distance to such targets is
impossible. In fact, although, this report remains using the term ‘ERA implementation’,
121

http://ec.europa.eu/research/index.cfm?pg=newsalert&year=2015&na=na-030315
Source: interviews
123
See for an elaboration of this barrier the briefing paper by Panteia “Monitoring Mechanisms of
an integrated European Research Area” for a more elaborate discussion of this argument.
122

PE 581.382

79

Cost of Non-Europe Report

this should be seen as the ‘implementation of actions aimed at ERA progress’. The openended ERA makes it very difficult to define gaps in absolute (quantifiable) terms.
Other and related gaps and barriers of the ERA implementation are as follows:






Heterogeneity is insufficiently incorporated in the ERA. Policies related to the ERA
are too much ‘one size fits all’ within this context. Differences in ERA benefits can
become disincentive to continue efforts to further implement the ERA.
Lack of political priority/ insufficient funds: In many countries, the ERA
implementation was under pressure with national budgets being severely hit by the
economic crisis. The lack of funds to implement the ERA, create a barrier in
implementation and therefore, hamper the expected benefits.
The research innovation policies are too fragmented. There still is a lack of
coordination. Coordinated efforts may lead to effective cost sharing and prevent
fragmentation and duplication of efforts.
Mutual learning is insufficiently institutionalised, partly due to the limited
usuability of the monitoring system124.

Heterogeneity
The differences between Member States (in terms of for instance national infrastructures,
national resources for public funding, research systems, RFOs and RSOs) are substantial.
For instance, not all countries benefit in the same way from the ERA.125 Policies related to
the ERA are within this context too much ‘one size fits all’. Differences in ERA benefits
can become disincentive to continue efforts to further implement the ERA.
The difference between countries seems to be so great, that the countries that are behind
cannot catch up. Although, over the years the stakeholders involved have made
substantial progress and evidence from the European Commission shows that the
progress towards ERA has declined, with convergence in research systems slowing.
Disparities between different EU countries are becoming increasingly apparent and
renewed efforts are required to boost progress towards an ERA 126.
Another example is related to priority 1 ‘More effective national research systems’. The
2012 Recommendation indicates two areas for work, namely allocating funding through
open calls for proposals; and assessing the quality of research-performing organisations
and teams and their outputs, as a basis for institutional funding decisions. In addition, the
Recommendation acknowledges that the balance between these two approaches may
vary.127 This depends on what is most appropriate given the national research system; in
the two areas, Member States’ governments and other stakeholders can make different
and even opposing choices. In relation to this, the different stakeholders, such as the
national governments, research performing organisations and research funding
organisations can have different interests and viewpoints on the ERA priorities and the
direction they should take. For example, universities are regarded within EMM with the
same indicators as any other research organisations, yet the academic nature of
See for an elaboration of this barrier the briefing paper by Panteia “Monitoring Mechanisms of
an integrated European Research Area” for a more elaborate discussion of this argument.
125
Source: interviews
126
European Commission, COM (2014), 130 Final/2. Annexes To The Communication From The
Commission To The European Parliament, The Council, The European Economic And Social
Committee And The Committee Of The Regions . Taking stock of the Europe 2020 strategy for
smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.
127
European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final A Reinforced European Research Area
Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
124

PE 581.382

80

European Research Area

universities’ work suggests they should have separate indicators for performance as they
also have to comply with other (education-related and society-related (valorisation))
objectives. The ICF report mentions that Member States criticize the current system for
Progress Reports, as they are not able to recognise the diversity of research systems and
pathways towards achieving the ERA128. The Progress Report 2014 acknowledges that
there is not a single a pathway for ERA completion: “There is no single path to achieve
ERA. The pace and level of ERA implementation very much depends on the national
context and is fostered by targeted policies at Member States level”.129
Europe would not benefit from one unified research system, but should aim at a stratified,
but integrated system respecting national differences and priorities to work together on
common themes. This view is more and more shared and reflected in the ERA Roadmap
2015. National governments are currently preparing the national ERA roadmaps.
Germany was the first to have published a roadmap in 2014. The fact that the ERA
Roadmap is validated by the EU council, can be interpreted as a first time commitment
from the Member States130.
Lack of political priority/ insufficient funds
Public research funding is one of the major instruments for steering the science system.
Policies affecting public research funding involve changes in funding volumes, and
changes in the allocation of funds mainly via i) modifications in the portfolio of funding
instruments, and/or ii) in the organisational structures responsible for the allocation of
funds. 131
This statement implies that additional funding would be required for implementation of
the ERA, whilst maintaining current running research programs. However, in many
countries, the ERA implementation has been under pressure with national budgets being
severely hit by the economic crisis. The (relative) lack of political priority funds is
reflected in the insufficient funding. This forms a barrier in implementation and therefore,
hampers the expected benefits. This observation has been mentioned in several
interviews. As illustrated above, overall R&D expenditure in the EU-28 increased in the
2003-2013 period, but is still well below the US and Japan.
More importantly, innovation-lagging and fiscally weak countries in the European Union
cut their public research and innovation (R&I) budgets during the crisis, while
innovation-leading and fiscally stronger countries forged ahead with public R&I
spending. Therefore, an increasing research and innovation division in Europe can be
seen. 132 It stands to be reasoned that this included the degree of ERA implementation.
Fragmented research innovation policies
The research innovation policies are too fragmented. There is still a lack of coordination.
Coordinated efforts may lead to effective cost sharing and prevent fragmentation and
duplication of efforts. Though fragmentation and the resulting inefficient spending of

128

ICF International (2015), Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and
Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation.
129
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The
Council And The European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014, p.7.
130
Source: interview
131
OECD (2011), Issue brief: Public sector research funding.
132
Veugelers, R. (2014), Undercutting the future? European research spending in times of fiscal
consolidation.

PE 581.382

81

Cost of Non-Europe Report

funding has been one of the reasons to develop the ERA in the first place 133, this is at the
same time a major challenge for its development. In 2010, the Commission identified too
much fragmentation and costly duplication as one of Europe’s three principle weaknesses
for innovation, besides underinvestment in our knowledge foundation and unsatisfactory
framework conditions (eg. poor access to finance). 134
In 2007, the EC concluded that fragmentation prevents Europe from fulfilling its potential
on research and innovation, posing a huge coast to Europeans (as taxpayers, consumers
and citizens): mobility for researchers is still curtailed by legal and practical barriers;
businesses often find it difficult to cooperate with research institutions across counties;
national and regional funding (programmes, infrastructures, core funding of research
institutions) remains largely uncoordinated, which leads to dispersion of resources,
duplication, unrealised benefits from spill overs, failure to play a role in major global
challenges; reforms undertaken at the national level often lack a true European
perspective and transnational coherence.’135
This fragmentation also plays a role in the figures and data presented in the Progress
Reports are fragmented: they provide detailed insight into, but no overall overview on
the implementation of the ERA. The reports do not include a general ranking of countries
for implementation of the ERA, as a consequence of the fact that the differences between
countries are too great to make a useful comparison. The countries differ in their starting
positions, priorities set for the research system, prioritisation allocated to ERA
implementation, level of policy reforms and availability of monitoring data. The Progress
Report 2014 classified countries on the basis of two indicators: “The first is the existence of
specific measures in support of the ERA as identified by Commission services. The second
is the level of implementation by funders and/or RPOs in comparison with the EU
average.” The classification therefore, does not provide an overview of the overall
progression. The report continues by stating that “in the absence of targets or identified
desirable levels of implementation, it is difficult to identify and assess an adequate level
of ERA implementation for each of the actions.”136
Few incentives for mutual learning
The European Monitoring Mechanism (EMM) is designed, as both a benchmarking
instrument and a tool for mutual learning. Stakeholders who were interviewed, but also
the ERAC secretariat, indicated that there is certainly room for improvement. The current
monitoring system is limited and only allows stakeholders to identify good practices in
other countries, thereby offering only a few incentives for mutual learning137.

133

See for example European Commission (2012), ERA-NETs and the realisation of ERA;
Increasing coordination and reducing fragmentation.
134
European Commission (2010). Communication From The Commission To The European
Parliament, The Council, The European Economic And Social Committee And The Committee Of
The Regions. Europe 2020 Flagship Initiative Innovation Union. Brussels, 6.10.2010; COM(2010)
546
final.
http://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-union/pdf/innovation-unioncommunication_en.pdf
135
Commission Of The European Communities (2007). Green Paper: The European Research
Area:
New
Perspectives.
Brussels,
4.4.2007;
COM(2007)
161
final.
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era_gp_final_en.pdf
136
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 Final Communication From The Commission To The
Council And The European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014:
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era_progress_report2014/era_progress-report_150521.pdf
137
See for an elaboration of this barrier the briefing paper by Panteia “Monitoring Mechanisms of
an integrated European Research Area”.

PE 581.382

82

European Research Area

4. Distance to target: quantification

Key messages






The open-ended nature of ERA makes it impossible to define an ‘end-state’
and thus to quantify the distance to that situation. The quantification
presented here is illustrative and serves to present current actions and
contribute to further progress. For this purpose, the ‘end-state’ is
considered to be defined in the 2012 Impact Assessment.
When combining the proportion of completion for each actor (Member
States 81%, Research stakeholder organisations 81%, Commission 80%), we
come to a total completion of 81%, which means the distance to target for
ERA implementation is 19%.
In the 2012 Impact Assessment it was concluded that the integration of the
European Research Area could result in a gain of 16 billion euros GDP
annually. When looking merely at the quantitative information, the
distance to target of 19% of the projected 16 billion revenue of full ERA
implementation, can be considered as the costs due to incomplete
implementation. This amounts to €3 billion annually.

This chapter focusses on the quantitative assessment of the distance towards the
establishment of the ERA and presents a level of completion for the three actors of
implementation: Member States, research stakeholder organisations and the European
Commission138.
As discussed, this study finds the ERA to be an open-ended process rather than an ‘endstate’ that can be reached. This implies that setting targets for the ERA as a whole, and
quantifying the distance to such targets, is impossible. However, further progress of the
ERA remains important. Therefore, aiming towards contributing to improving this
process, this chapter presents a quantification of the distance to target, with the target
being the situation aimed at in the context of the 2012 Impact Assessment and being
monitored by the Progress Report 2013 and 2014.
Three of the four conditions identified by the Commission in the 2014 Progress Report
form the basis for the calculation of ‘distance to target’, presented for each type of
stakeholder, namely:
1.
2.
3.

Member State reforms in all ERA priorities;
Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the Communi cation by
research stakeholders;
Increased support from the Commission to national ERA policies.

138

As also explained in the introduction chapter of this report, all 5 priorities of ERA have been
taken into account for this assessment. See annex for an explanation of the approach used for the
calculations.

PE 581.382

83

Cost of Non-Europe Report

The fourth condition, ‘Transparent monitoring (EMM)’ is dealt with in a separate briefing
paper.139 In this research paper, the ‘distance to target’ on each of the conditions is related
to the estimated annual benefit of ERA completion. The quantification is therefore, based
on the building blocks, as outlined in the following schematic overview.

Relevant barriers:

Operationalisation:

Condition:

Figure 8: Building blocks for quantification of costs of suboptimal
implementation of ERA
Member State
Speedy
Increased
Annual benefit
implementation support from
of ERA
reforms in all
of the priorities the Commission completion
ERA priorities
outlined in the
to national ERA
Communication policies
by research
stakeholders
Adoption of
measures in
support of ERA
implementation
at MS level

Compliance of
research
performing
organisations
(RPOs)

Adoption of
measures in
support of ERA
implementation
at EU level

Heterogeneity:
Differences in
ERA benefits as a
disincentive to
continue

Research
innovation
policies are too
fragmented

Heterogeneity:
One size fits all
does not fit

16 billion Euro

Lack of funds
Heterogeneity:
One size fits all
does not fit

Source: authors
A cautionary note with regard to the calculation should be made here. As was
already stated in the introduction of this report, there are some inevitable
shortcomings with regards to the adopted approach. The quantification does not
critically assess the result from the impact assessment calculating the 16 billion euro
annual benefit of the ERA completion. 140 It takes this calculation as a given.
However, the concept of the ERA is volatile and qualitative in nature, and therefore,
does not allow for a solid quantification of its progress. The figures adopted from
the Impact Assessment that are used as a basis in this report, should therefore , be
intepreted with caution.
In the briefing paper by Panteia “Monitoring Mechanisms of an integrated European Research
Area”, the EMM is further described and reflected upon (unpublished at the time of writing).
140
There are indications in interviews that the approach taken in the Impact Assessment did not
fully make ues of the input potentially provided by the stakeholders. As indicated earlier, the
selected actions are not always and in all situations, the best ones to take (see sectionn 1.3). In
addition, the difficulties identified for quantification lie at the heart of the Impact Assessment such
as the lack of a baseline to compare progress.
139

PE 581.382

84

European Research Area

A detailed description of the methodology for calculating the cost of non implementation of the ERA, can be found in the annex.

4.1 Member State reforms in all ERA priorities
To assess the level of implementation by Member States, we take a look at the ERA
condition 1: Member State reforms in all ERA priorities. The most recent available
information is the country fiches141 that accompany the 2014 Progress Report. These
country fiches contain an overview of the measures taken for each ERA priority since
2012. A mapping exercise of the adoption of measures in support of ERA implementation
in all Member States, shows an average level of implementation of around 81%. In other
words, one can say that condition 1 has been 81% (which can be interpreted as a distance
to target of 19%) completed.

4.2 Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the
Communication by research stakeholders
The focus of the research stakeholder organisations is on condition 2: Speedy
implementation of the priorities outlined in the Communication by research stakeholders.
Looking at the compliance of research performing organisations (RPOs), the 2014
Progress Report shows that 81% is ERA compliant (organisations that are implementing
some or all of the ERA actions with high intensity). The organisations that are ERA
compliant are used in this report as a proxy for implementation by research stakeholder
organisations. With this, we conclude that the level of implementation for RPOs is 81%
and therefore, a distance to target of 19%. It is important to note that RFOs are not taken
into account in this analysis.

4.3 Increased support from the Commission to national ERA
policies
Condition 3 is focused on increased support from the Commission to national ERA
policies. The points of departure are the actions assigned to the Commission in the 2012
Communication. To assess this condition and the distance to target, the Commission has
provided information on the status of each action (not started, ongoing, and completed).
This exercise shows that in total, the completion of this specific condition is 80% (distance
to target: 20%).

4.4 Conclusion
When the figures presented in this chapter are added up, we come to a total completion of
81%, which means the distance to target for ERA implementation is 19%.
There are two conclusions that can be drawn. Firstly, a completion of 81% of the ERA
shows that progress is ‘on the right track’. As concluded before by the Council of the
European Union, ERA stakeholders have made substantial progress, yet further efforts

141

http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/eraprogress_en.htm

PE 581.382

85

Cost of Non-Europe Report

are needed to complete the ERA. Secondly, calculations show that the distance to full
implementation of the ERA, are very similar for the three actors (all around 80%).
In the 2012 Impact Assessment it was concluded the integration of the European Research
Area could result in a gain of 16 billion euros GDP annually. When looking only at the
quantitative information, the distance to target of 19% of the projected 16 billion revenue
of full ERA implementation, can be considered as the costs due to incomplete
implementation. This amounts to €3 billion annually

Recommendations: Towards further implementation of ERA
Key messages




The ERA implementation is quite advanced but could be further stimulated
when policies better acknowledge the following key barriers that are
identified in relation to ERA implementation (2012-2015): There are
differences in ERA benefits, resulting is a disincentive to continue; A one
size fits all approach does not fit with countries’ heterogeneity in research
systems; At country level there is a lack of priority and funds in ERA
implementation; The research innovation policies are too fragmented;
Mutual learning between stakeholders is insufficiently institutionalised.
Given these barriers, the Roadmap 2015-2020 approach is a positive
development, able to overcome these barriers. In this approach it is
recommended to foster inclusiveness of all countries, and use knowledge
exchange and self-assessment to provide directions for improvement.

From the quantitative assessment presented in this report, it can be concluded that the
ERA implementation is quite advanced. However, it is important to note that in absence
of a definition of ‘success’, it is problematic to assess the level of implementation of the
ERA. The ERA should not be about completion, as it is an ongoing process, which cannot
be achieved by carrying out certain activities 142.
In addition to the quantifications, this report also identified a number of structural
barriers for the ERA implementation since 2012 that require attention in order to strive to
a further progressed ERA implementation. In this section some of these barriers are
mentioned after which recommendations are provided in order to remove these barriers.




142
143

Heterogeneity leads to differences in ERA benefits as a disincentive to continue
and to actions and priorities that are too much ‘one size fits all’:
o Not all countries benefit in the same way: some are drivers, while others lag
behind143. The differences between countries and research systems seem to be so
large, that it is doubtful if the countries that are behind will be able to catch up.
o One size fits all does not fit with countries heterogeneity in research systems: A
related criticism is that there has been too little room for national heterogeneity.
Becoming a uniform research area should not be the aim and is not beneficial.
Lack of priority (and funds): In many countries, the ERA implementation was under
pressure with national budgets being severely hit by the economic crisis. The lack of
funds to implement the ERA, create a barrier in implementation and therefore,
hamper the expected benefits.

Source: interviews
Source: interviews

PE 581.382

86

European Research Area




The research innovation policies are too fragmented. There still is a lack of
coordination. Coordinated efforts may lead to effective cost sharing and prevent
fragmentation and duplication of efforts.
Mutual learning is insufficiently institutionalised, partly due to the limited
usability of the monitoring system144.

Based on these barriers, it is recommended to further develop the ERA Roadmap 20152020 approach as has been put forward in recent publications and discussions. This
approach, based on nationally tailored policy plans and priorities, is a good step in the
right direction to see the ERA as a complex and multi-faceted policy field in which
heterogeneity of research systems needs to be fostered. In order to continue working on
overcoming the barriers mentioned in the ERA Roadmap 2015-2020 approach, the authors
of this report suggest to focus on the following issues:





Despite the voluntary basis for Member States and stakeholders to develop a
Roadmap, strive towards inclusiveness of all countries and all stakeholder groups
through for instance, benchmarking, learning events, and peer review.
Countries that are lagging behind need incentives to prioritise the ERA. For this, it
could help to see ERA implementation not as something to complete, but as a mirror
to assess the country’s national research system and to provide directions for
improvement.
Further stimulate knowledge exchange on issues that are relevant for specific
countries through the established and operational Policy Support Facility. In addition,
an annual thematic report on a specific issue could be useful for Member States. At
present, this mutual learning aspect is not being used to its full potential and more
focus on this aspect will likely create increased benefits of the ERA.145

See for an elaboration of this barrier the briefing paper by Panteia “Monitoring Mechanisms of
an integrated European Research Area”.
145
See the briefing paper by Panteia “Monitoring Mechanisms of an integrated European Research
Area” for a more elaborate discussion of this argument.
144

PE 581.382

87

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Annex: Methodology and sources
Calculating distance to target
In order to answer the central question of this report on the costs incurred due to gaps in
the ERA infrastructure, a distance to completion of the ERA has to be estimated. Targets
or desirable levels of implementation have not been identified for the ERA, which makes
identification and assessment of adequate levels of ERA implementation for each of the
actions very difficult146. Some considerations are presented in Chapter 4. This annex aims
to describe the approach taken to assess the level of implementation.
The conditions for the ERA147 serve as a starting point towards establishing the distance to
target, in order to calculate the non- implementation costs of the ERA.
The following table summarises our approach to the calculation, broken down by the 4
conditions:

146

Communication From The Commission To The Council And The European Parliament.
European Research Area Progress Report 2014, [COM (2014) 575 Final].
147
Identified in the 2014 Progress Report

PE 581.382

88

European Research Area

Condition
Condition 1:
Member State
reforms in all
ERA priorities

Source
Overview of adoption of
measures since 2012 in
support of ERA
implementation,
included in the country
fiches (part of the ERA
Progress Report 2014) 148

Methodology and considerations
For all 5 priorities, the country fiches provide an overview of measures adopted by the Member
States. On this information, it was assessed whether or not measures have been adopted by the
Member States per priority. Therefore, there are two possible outcomes: positive (one or more
measures taken since 2012) or negative (no measures taken since 2012). This was translated into a
percentage: 0, 20, 40, 60, 80 or 100% (for 0-5 priorities in which measures were taken). For each
priority, it was calculated which percentage of the 28 Member States had adopted measures. On the
basis of this, the EU average was calculated (an aggregation of all pr iorities for all Member States).
Considerations
If a country took measures, this entails that it has taken steps/reforms towards ERA. The difficulty
is that 1 reform since 2012 would be calculated as ‘target achieved’, though the actual content and
weight of measures is not taken into account. Moreover, it is important to note that ‘no measures
taken since 2012’ could in practice mean that the necessary measures had already been taken prior
to 2012.

Condition 2:
Speedy
implementation
of the priorities
outlined in the
Communication
by research
stakeholders

2014 Progress Report:
ERA compliance of
RPOs (p. 9)

To establish the distance to target for condition 2, the share of institutions, weighted by number of
researchers was used. Three clusters were identified: ERA compliant, limited compliance, ERA not
applicable. The weighted share of organisations within the ‘ERA compliant’ cluster, were used as
the proxy for the level of implementation for condition 2.
Considerations
Due to the voluntary nature of the 2014 ERA Survey, the figures are not representative and only relate to
research performing organisations that answered the Survey in 2014.149

148

http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/eraprogress_en.htm
This includes funders which manage 34% van GBOARD in the EU, performers which employ 32% of total staff and 20% of researchers in RPOs. The constituency in
the survey gathers 20% of the most important RPOs as identified by Member States.
149

PE 581.382

89

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Condition 3:
Increased
support from the
Commission to
national ERA
policies

Condition
Transparent
monitoring
(EMM)

PE 581.382

4:

2012 Communication:
actions defined (for each
priority) and
information provided by
the Commission (DG
Research and
Innovation, Unit ERA
policy) on actions taken.

DG research indicated which actions the EC has completed. The categories used were:
1 = not started
2 = ongoing process
3 = completed
On the basis of the information received from the Commission, the r esearch team calculated the
level of implementation by assigning a percentage to each category (1 = 0%, 2= 75%, 3 = 100%).

Considerations
Using only three categories and assigning 75% completion to actions is of course a simplification,
which in some cases does not do justice to complex realities. However, as the taken actions are
often ongoing and in advanced stages, it is justified to give 75% to actions that are not comple ted
yet. As with the first condition of Member States, relative importance of actions is not taken into
consideration.
This condition is different from the others as it only has an indirect effect on the completion of the ERA: incomplete
monitoring fulfilment does not necessarily relate directly to the fulfilment of the ERA. For this reason, a separate report has
been dedicated to this condition.

90

European Research Area

Now that the approach has been described, we continue with the actual calculation.
The table below shows that every condition weighs for one third (as the final
condition is not taken into account here). It furthermore , details the sublevels (for
condition 3) and the results of the calculation. All 5 priorities have b een taken into
account for the calculation.

Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3

Weight
33,3%
33,3%
33,3%

Sublevel weight

Priority 1: 20%
Priority 2: 20%
Priority 3: 20%
Priority 4: 20%
Priority 5: 20%

Result
81,4%
81%
Priority 1: 75%
Priority 2: 63,8%
Priority 3: 85,7%
Priority 4: 87,5%
Priority 5: 90,6%
Total average: 80,5%

Condition 4
Level of
implementation
of ERA
Distance
to
target

Not taken into account
100%

Total average condition 1, 2, 3:
81%
100- 81 = 19%

Selection of countries
Country case studies are a key part of this study. In order to make a selection of countries
that is as varied and relevant as possible, the classification from the 2014 Progress Report
was used. Within the progress report, two criteria were used to classify the countries
regarding the ERA implementation:
1.
2.

Existence of specific measures in support of ERA (as identified by Commission
services)
The level of implementation by funders and/or RPOs (in comparison with EU
average).

On this basis, four possible groups were identified:
Figure A1: Classification of countries according to ERA policies and implementation of
the ERA Actions

PE 581.382

91

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Source: Directorate-General for Research & Innovation
In the Progress Report 2014, it is stated that the results of the map imply that there is not
a single path to the ERA: the implementation of the ERA above the EU average is
sometimes directly driven by funders and RPOs (bottom-up) and in some cases by
national/regional policies (top-down). The following map shows the classification of
Member States:
Figure A2: Classification of Member States according to their policies in support of
ERA and their implementation

Taking into account the categories, as well as geographical range, we came to the
following selection of country studies:

PE 581.382

92

European Research Area

-

Austria (top-down)
Czech Republic (limited implementation by stakeholders)
Finland (bottom-up)
Portugal
(limited
measures
and
limited

PE 581.382

93

implementation)

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Interviews
As part of the study, interviews were carried out with key stakeholders at both EU and
MS levels. Some interviews were conducted face-to-face or in writing, but most were
conducted by telephone. An interview script was developed for the semi-structured
interviews. All interviews were carried out between July 30 th, 2015 and September 28th,
2015.

List of interviewees:
EU level
Fabienne Gautier (DG Research and Innovation)
Arie van der Zwan (DG Research and Innovation)
Amanda Crowfoot (Science Europe)
Stephan Kuster (Science Europe)
Edward Ziarko (chair monitoring ERAC Working Group)
Lidia Borrél (EUA)
Austria
Christian Naczinsky (Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economy)
Andrea Höglinger (Austrian Research Promotion Agency-FFG)
Finland
Riitta Maijala (Ministry of Education and Culture)
Portugal
Vítor Corado Simões (JRC correspondent Portugal)
Ana Quartin (Foundation for Science and Technology, on behalf of ERAC delegation
Portugal)
Czech Republic
Martin Srholec (JRC correspondent Czech Republic)
Mikal Pazour (Technology Centre ASCR)
Lukas Levák (Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports)

PE 581.382

94

European Research Area

Bibliography
Artile 182.5 of the Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, cited in ICF International (2015). Assessment of progress in achieving ERA
in Member States and Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and
Innovation.
Council of the European Union (2014). European Research Area Progress Report 2014 –
Competitiveness Council Meeting. Brussels, 05.12.2014.
Council of the European Union (2015). Draft Council conclusions on the European
Research Area Roadmap 2015-2020 – Adoption. Brussels, 19.05.2015. (8975/15).
ERAC (ERAC 1201/14). ERAC Opinion on the European Research Area Progress Report
2013. Brussels, 09-01-2014
European Commission — Directorate-General for Research (2008), Diversified Funding
streams for University-based research: Impact of external project-based research
funding on financial management in Universities: http://ec.europa.eu/invest-inresearch/pdf/download_en/external_funding_final_report.pdf
European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area
Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
European Commission, COM (2014), 130 Final/2. Annexes To The Communication From
The Commission To The European Parliament, The Council, The European
Economic And Social Committee And The Committee Of The Regions . Taking
stock of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 Final Communication From The Commission To
The Council And The European Parliament. European Research Area Progress
Report 2014.
European Commission, COM (2000) 6 final - Not published in the Official Journal,
Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions of 18 January
2000: Towards a European research area.
European Commission, COM, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2015).
Horizon 2020: first results.
ICF International (2015). Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and
Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation
OECD (2011), OECD Innovation Policy Platform ISSUE BRIEF: PUBLIC SECTOR
RESEARCH FUNDING: www.oecd.org/innovation/policyplatform
Republik Österreich (2011), Realising potentials, increasing dynamics, creating the future:
Becoming an Innovation Leader.
Science Europe (2014). Science Europe Position Statement on Priority One of the 2012 ERA
Communication: More Effective National Research Systems.

PE 581.382

95

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Veugelers, R. (2014), Undercutting the future? European research spending in times of
fiscal consolidation.
Consulted websites:
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/eraprogress_en.htm
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/partnership_en.htm
http://ec.europa.eu/research/index.cfm?pg=newsalert&year=2015&na=na-030315
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/era-net-in-horizon-2020_en.html
http://era.gv.at/directory/89

PE 581.382

96

European Research Area

Annex III
Research Paper on the Monitoring Mechanisms of the
Integrated European Research Area

Research paper
by Laura de Haan, Paul Vroonhof (Panteia), Simon
Broek (Ockham IPS)

Abstract
The paper identifies some fundamental shortcomings - as well as technical
shortcomings - related to the monitoring of ERA, such as the fact that the one set of
indicators runs the risk of not capturing the high level of heterogeneity in terms of
objectives and interests. In addition, there is a lack of entry points for mutual
learning and a lack of incentives for governments to take action. Based on an
indicative assessment, if the monitoring system allowed more effective policy
learning, the ERA implementation would have been further developed. This
difference in development is indicatively quantified as €1.5 billion. It should be
noted that this estimation should be treated with caution. The following
recommendations are made for a future ERA monitoring system: 1) Focus, besides
the quantitative indicators, on qualitative policy-related benchmarks as the ERA
implementation is first of all about removing barriers and creating favourable
conditions. 2) Set up an ERA policy index. 3) Set baseline values and target values
for specific indicators. 4) Set up a system of self-assessment. 5) Continue and
intensify efforts for country peer reviewing and self-assessment as part of the
Policy Support Facility.

PE 581.382

97

Cost of Non-Europe Report

AUTHOR
This paper has been written by Laura de Haan and Paul Vroonhof of Panteia and
Simon Broek of Ockham IPS, at the request of the European Added Value Unit of the
Directorate for Impact Assessment and European Added Value, within the Directorate
General for Parliamentary Research Services (DG EPRS) of the General Secretariat of
the European Parliament. It is part of a Cost of Non-Europe report produced for the
European Parliament’s Committee on Industry, Energy and Research.
RESPONSIBLE ADMINISTRATORS
Christian Salm and Thomas Zandstra, European Added Value Unit
To contact the Unit, please e-mail EPRS-EuropeanAddedValueUnit@ep.europa.eu

LINGUISTIC VERSIONS
Original: EN
DISCLAIMER
The opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and
do not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.
Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorized, provided
the source is acknowledged and the publisher is given prior notice and sent a copy.
Manuscript completed in February 2016
Brussels © European Union, 2016.

PE 581.382

98

European Research Area

CONTENTS
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... 100
Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................. 102
1.Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 103
2.State of play of monitoring .................................................................................................... 105
2.1
2.2

ERA Progress Reports .............................................................................................. 105
ERA Roadmap 2015-2020 ........................................................................................ 107

3.Assessment of ERA monitoring ............................................................................................ 110
3.1 Fundamental shortcomings related to the objective of monitoring ................... 110
3.2 Technical shortcomings concerning the data collection and presentation ........ 112
4.Quantification of ineffectiveness of monitoring system .................................................... 115
4.1 Estimate the overall distance to the completion of ERA ...................................... 116
4.2 Determine the contribution of the monitoring to the overall distance to the
completion of ERA .................................................................................................... 116
4.3 Caution when using the quantification .................................................................. 117
5.Improving the monitoring mechanism ................................................................................ 118
Annex: Methodology and sources ........................................................................................... 120
Calculating distance to targe ............................................................................................ 120
Quantification of condition 4 (transparent monitoring) .............................................. 123
Selection of countries......................................................................................................... 123
Interviews ........................................................................................................................... 126
Bibliography ....................................................................................................................... 127

PE 581.382

99

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Executive Summary
The concept of the European Research Area (ERA) was first launched at the Lisbon
European Council in 2000. As originally defined, the concept promoted increased coordination and cooperation among national research policies and programmes. This
briefing paper examines the ERA monitoring mechanisms and provides an answer to the
following four questions: 1) What is the current state of the monitoring system and the
criteria used? 2) To what extent are the current monitoring mechanisms and criteria in
principal sufficient and detailed enough to assess the level of implementation of the ERA
infrastructure with regard to the five ERA priorities? 3) What are the costs incurred due to
gaps or barriers in the monitoring mechanisms as established by the Commission? 4)
Which monitoring mechanisms and criteria should be introduced to improve the
monitoring mechanism used by the Commission? As a summary, the key findings of the
chapters, answering the four research questions, are presented here below.

State of play of monitoring
The ERA monitoring mechanism (EMM) was developed with the aim of assessing
progress in the compliance of ERA at three levels: Firstly, at the policy level information is
gathered on some key indicators to provide an inventory of what national and regional
policies have been developed and implemented. The data is gathered by consultants in
consultation with the national stakeholders. Secondly, at the operational level the
monitoring tries to assess the extent to which of the research funding organisations
(RFOs) and research-performing organisations (RPOs) comply with a number of key
criteria of ERA. The data is gathered through a survey launched by the European
Commission. Finally, at European level, the EMM brings together the findings from the
other levels to provide a state of play of the implementation of ERA in Europe. The
gathered information forms the basis for the ERA Progress Reports. For the new period
2015-2020, acknowledging that ERA implementation is an ongoing process, the Council of
the European Union endorsed the ERA Roadmap 2015-2020. The adoption of the ERA
Roadmap also has consequences for the monitoring system of ERA. The Roadmap, more
than the 2012 Communication, explicitly recognizes the differences between national
research systems (whereas the Progress Reports were criticized for paying too little
attention to national differences). This entails that the Roadmap will have to be situated in
national contexts, translated into national roadmaps and hence the EMM will have to be
adapted accordingly.

Assessment of ERA monitoring
There are fundamental shortcomings related to the objective of monitoring: the
heterogeneity of the countries’ objectives in ERA implementation is not sufficiently taken
into account, and there is a lack of entry points for mutual learning and as well as
incentives for governments to take action. There are technical shortcomings concerning
the data collection and presentation: availability of data is problematic and there are no
baselines or objectives to serve as a reference. Figures and data presented in the Progress
Reports are fragmented: they provide an insight on a detailed level, but no overall
overview.

PE 581.382

100

European Research Area

Quantification of ineffectiveness of monitoring system
Based on an indicative assessment, if the monitoring system allowed more effective policy
learning, the ERA implementation could have been further developed. This difference in
development is indicatively quantified as being between 0 Euro and 3 billion Euro (mean
of 1.5 billion Euro). It should be noted that the in the scenarios expressed estimations
should be treated with caution due to the following reasons. Firstly, as argued earlier, it is
perhaps not right to speak about the completion of ERA as ERA implementation is an
ongoing process. Secondly, the contribution of ineffective monitoring to the suboptimal
level of implementation is not quantifiable and hence the calculation replies on providing
a bandwidth and a mean.

Improving the monitoring mechanism
A future ERA monitoring system should acknowledge 1) that not one set of indicators
could capture the high level of heterogeneity in terms of objectives and interests as
expressed by different stakeholders; 2) the need for increased possibilities for mutual
learning; 3) the need for more qualitative information about stages of development of
policy development and implementation; 4) that monitoring should be in line with the
Roadmap approach of creating ownership at national level; 5) the monitoring should
create incentives for governments and other stakeholders to act. Based on this, the
following recommendations are provided:

Focus, besides the quantitative indicators, on qualitative policy-related benchmarks
as the ERA implementation is first of all about removing barriers and creating
favourable conditions.

Set up an ERA policy index. This ERA policy index could consist of a small number
of key policy development areas on which a level of maturity can be identified. For
instance a five-level scoreboard150:
o No system in place and developments are based on ad-hoc activities;
o Dialogue between stakeholders is organised leading to first steps of
policy planning;
o Break-even point: dialogue between stakeholders leads to results: policy
plans and programmes;
o Implementation: policies and programmes are being implemented;
o M&E, reviews, improvement: Results from independent evaluations or
peer reviews are shared with key stakeholders and recommendations
from evaluations and peer reviews feed back into further developments.

Set baseline values and target values for specific indicators to allow becoming
visible progression and direction towards the agreed objectives, related to the ERA
policy index.

Set up a system of self-assessment (associated with the Roadmap). This would
allow countries to identify areas in which they are strong and areas where they
might be weak.

Continue and intensify efforts for country peer reviewing and self-assessment as
part of the Policy Support Facility, which is designed to help EU Member States
reform their research and innovation systems.

A similar principle was suggested by ICF, labelled ‘a traffic light rating system’ that could assess the performance for
ERA progress, and present it the form of three status categories. (ICF International,(2015), Assessment of progress in
achieving ERA in Member States and Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation)
150

PE 581.382

101

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Abbreviations
ANI
CESAER
EARTO
EC
EMM
ERA
ERAC
ESFRI
EU
EUA
FP7
GDP
GBAORD
GBARD
GERD
JPI
LERU
NG
NRP
OECD
R&D
RI
RFO
RPO
RSO
SHO

PE 581.382

National Innovation Agency
Conference of European Schools for Advanced Engineering Education
and Research
European Association of Research and Technology Organisations
European Commission
ERA monitoring mechanism
European Research Area
European Research Area and Innovation Committee
European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures
European Union
European University Association
Framework Programme 7
Gross Domestic Product
Government Budget Appropriations or Outlays on Research and
Development
Government Budget Appropriations on Research and Development
Gross domestic expenditure on research and development
Joint Programming Initiative
League of European Research Universities
National Government
National Reform Programme
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Research & Development
Research Infrastructure
Research Funding Organisations
Research Performing Organisations
Research Stakeholder Organisations
Stakeholder Organisation

102

European Research Area

1. Introduction
The concept of the European Research Area (ERA) was first launched at the Lisbon
European Council in 2000. Prior to that, the landscape of research in Europe was
scattered, the EU involvement in other European programs was limited and national
research policies were largely closed. The Lisbon Council called for a change in research
and innovation governance at the EU level and proposed the concept of the European
Research Area. This concept, as originally defined, promoted increased co-ordination and
cooperation among national research policies and programmes 151.
This briefing paper examines the ERA monitoring mechanisms. The monitoring system
related to the implementation of an ERA is an area which has come under discussion as
for instance expressed by ERAC (European Research Area and Innovation Committee)152,
Science Europe153 and a European Commission commissioned report on the indicators
system by ICF154. Despite all efforts, there is no reliable data to monitor ERA compliance.
14 years after the European Council's call in 2001 for mapping excellence in R&D in all
Member States, and six years after the EU Council called for reporting on R&D target
progress in all National Reform Programmes (NRPs), still only 19 out of 28 Member States
NRPs report on ERA implementation actions. It has proven difficult to establish a system
that accounts for the complex nature of ERA and provides indicators for national context
factors. Based on the available data, performance of countries with regards to innovation,
research and development varies greatly. As a result, looking at the average EU progress
in this area, some Member States are drivers whilst others lag behind.
The Commission155 stated in 2014 that strengthening ERA monitoring is one of the key
future challenges of ERA: “The EMM [ERA Monitoring Mechanism] is based on indicators and
data gathering mechanisms, agreed with the Member States. ERA monitoring has proved useful in
measuring progress made on the ERA policy actions. However, the exercise has its limits […].
Further work is needed to identify and fine-tune essential indicators of progress in ERA and
potentially expand the scope of EMM”.
This briefing paper first presents a description of the monitoring mechanisms (chapter 2).
The paper then continues with an assessment on whether the monitoring mechanisms
proposed by the Commission are sufficient to assess the functioning of the ERA and
whether the monitoring provides encouragement to continue to work on the ERA
implementation (through benchmarking and peer learning) (chapter 3). Subsequently, the
result of this analysis will be compared with the Commission´s impact assessment, which
calculated that the integration of the European Research Area could result in a gain of 16
billion annual GDP156, to estimate to which extent the identified gaps and barriers will

151

Tender Specifications
The European Research Area and Innovation Committee (ERAC) is a strategic policy advisory committee whose
principal mission is to provide timely strategic input to the Council, the Commission and Member States on research and
innovation issues that are relevant to the development of the European Research Area, the European Semester and the
Europe 2020 flagship initiative Innovation Union. The mandate of the Committee is set out in an annex to the Council
resolution on the advisory work for the European Research Area of 31 May 2013 (doc. 10331/13). The Secretariat of the
Committee is provided by the General Secretariat of the Council (http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/partnership_en.htm)
153
Science Europe is an association of European Research Funding Organisations (RFO) and Research Performing
Organisations (RPO), based in Brussels. Its founding General Assembly took place in Berlin in October 2011
(http://www.scienceeurope.org/).
154
ERAC (ERAC 1201/14).ERAC Opinion on the European Research Area Progress Report 2013. Brussels, 09-01-2014;
“ERAC Working Group to discuss ERA Roadmap indicators”. http://era.gv.at/object/news/1842; ICF International (2015).
Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and
Innovation; Science Europe (2012), Science Europe Statement on the European Research Area
155
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European
Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014,
156
Impact Assessment report (SWD (2012) 212 final), accompanying the document European Commission, COM (2012)
392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
152

PE 581.382

103

Cost of Non-Europe Report

reduce this number (chapter 4). Finally, chapter 5 presents recommendations and
suggestions to improve the monitoring system.
In particular, the briefing paper will address the following questions:






What is the current state of the monitoring system and the criteria used?
To what extent are the current monitoring mechanisms and criteria in principal sufficient
and detailed enough to assess the level of implementation of the ERA infrastructure with
regard to the five ERA priorities (more effective national research systems, optimal
transnational co-operation and competition, an open labour market for researchers, gender
equality and gender mainstreaming in research and optimal circulation, access to and
transfer of scientific knowledge including via digital ERA)?
What are the costs incurred due to gaps or barriers in the monitoring mechanisms as
established by the Commission?
Which monitoring mechanisms and criteria should be introduced to improve the
monitoring mechanism used by the Commission?

It needs to be noted that because the European Commission uses the concept of ERA
completion157, the quantification of the costs relates to the idea of ERA as something that
can be completed and in relation to which a distance to target can be provided. This being
said, when it comes to further improving the monitoring system, this report, based on an
assessment of the available information, regards ERA implementation as an open-ended
process.158 Characterising ERA as an open-ended process, discredits the idea of a ‘distance
to target’, however in this report thinking in terms of completion serves as a heuristic or
diagnostic tool allowing stakeholders to see room for improvement.

European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for
Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012.
158
”ERA is an ongoing process with many different stakeholders and decision-makers at multiple levels.” ERAC (ERAC
1201/14).ERAC Opinion on the European Research Area Progress Report 2013. Brussels, 09-01-2014
157

PE 581.382

104

European Research Area

2. State of play of monitoring
Key messages




The ERA monitoring mechanism (EMM) was developed with the aim of
assessing progress in the compliance of ERA at three levels: firstly, at the
policy level (national and regional policies); secondly, at the operational
level (research funding organisations (RFOs) and research-performing
organisations (RPOs)); and finally, at European level, the EMM brings
together the findings from the other levels to provide a state of play of the
implementation of ERA in Europe. The outcomes of the EMM form the basis
for the ERA Progress Reports.
For the new period 2015-2020, acknowledging that ERA implementation is
an open-ended process, the Council of the European Union endorsed the
ERA Roadmap 2015-2020. The adoption of the ERA Roadmap also has
consequences for the monitoring system of ERA. The Roadmap, more than
the 2012 Communication, explicitly recognizes the differences between
national research systems (whereas the Progress Reports were criticized for
paying too little attention to national differences). This entails that the
Roadmap will have to be situated in national contexts, translated into
national roadmaps and hence the EMM will have to be adapted
accordingly.

In this chapter, the first research question is dealt with: What is the current state of the
monitoring system and the criteria used? The nature of this chapter is descriptive, as it
aims to present the ERA monitoring in the period from 2012 until now. As the monitoring
system is in a phase of transition whereby the existing system is not (fully) replaced by a
new system (the roadmaps are still under negotiation in many countries), the Chapter will
in the first section (2.1) describe the monitoring mechanisms that have been used in the
ERA Progress Reports published in 2013 and 2014. The second section (2.2) aims to
describe the monitoring system and developments surrounding the recently launched
ERA Roadmap 2015-2020. Describing the monitoring systems for both the 2012-2014
period and the 2015-2020 allows identifying fundamental and technical shortcomings in
Chapter 3 (assessment).

2.1

ERA Progress Reports (2012-2014)

For the period 2012-2014, the guiding document for ERA has been the 2012
Communication159, which identified priorities as well as actions to be taken by the
different stakeholders. This document envisaged that by 2014, when all actions are taken
by the different stakeholders and the Commission, ERA would enter a phase of
‘completion’.
The ERA monitoring mechanism (EMM) is based on indicators and data gathering
mechanisms, agreed with the Member States160. The EMM was developed with the aim of
assessing progress in the compliance of ERA at three levels:
159

European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and
Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
160
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The Council And The
European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014

PE 581.382

105

Cost of Non-Europe Report







Firstly, at the policy level information is gathered on some key indicators to
provide an inventory of what national and regional policies have been developed
and implemented. The data is gathered by means of a number of activities
including research prepared by ERAWATCH161 in consultation with the national
stakeholders.
Secondly, at the operational level the monitoring tries to assess the extent to
which of the research funding organisations (RFOs) and research-performing
organisations (RPOs) comply with a number of key criteria of ERA. The data is
gathered through a survey launched by the European Commission.162
Finally, at European level, the EMM brings together the findings from the other
levels to provide a state of play of the implementation of ERA in Europe.

The gathered information forms the basis for the ERA Progress Reports. At the time of
writing of this report, two ERA Progress Reports have been published: 2013 and 2014 163.
The next Progress Report is planned for 2016, as it has been concluded that a two year
interval is more appropriate for the dynamics of ERA.
The 2013 ERA Progress Report presented an overview of the political context, steps taken
and first achievements of Member States and selected Associated Countries. The report is
accompanied by country fiches presenting the state of play for each ERA priority as
identified so far, including new measures mentioned in the 2013 National Reform
Programmes and/or identified during country visits. The ERA Facts and Figures 2013 is
based on different sources of information: 164
1. Contributions and comments by national authorities on the policy context and
different measures identified by the Commission;
2. The 2013 National Reform Programmes submitted by the Member States in the
context of the European Semester;
3. Country missions undertaken by the Commission’s services to analyse EU
Member States’ programmes of economic and structural reforms;
4. Eurostat official statistics;
5. Specific analysis of the implementation at national level of the ERA
Communication priorities carried out by the Joint Research Centre with the
support of independent national experts;
6. Research Funding Organisations’ (RFOs) and Research Performing
Organisations’ (RPOs) responses to the ‘2012 Survey on the State of Play of the
implementation of ERA’;
7. Contributions by Stakeholder Organisations (SHO) which participate in the ERA
Platform (the European Association of Research and Technology Organisations
161

ERAWATCH provides information on European, national and regional research and innovation systems, policies, and
programmes in the EU and beyond. It supports evidence based policy making in Europe and contributes to the realisation of
the European Research Area (ERA). ERAWATCH covers 61 countries: the 28 Member States of the European Union, 13
countries associated with the 7th European Community's Research Framework Programme and 20 third countries. It also
provides an overview of the European Union. ERAWATCH information has been collected and presented by JRC-IPTS
with the support of external experts. Since 2013 ERAWATCH content updates have been focused primarily on Annual
Country Reports (ACR), Country Fiches and other relevant analytical reports. See: http://erawatch.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
162
See: ERA survey 2012: http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/survey2012_en.htm ; ERA survey 2014:
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/era_survey2014_en.htm
163
European Commission, COM(2013) 637 final. Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament:
European
Research
Area
Progress
Report
2013:
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era_progress_report2013/era_progress_report2013.pdf ; European Commission, COM
(2014) 575 Final Communication From The Commission To The Council And The European Parliament. European
Research Area Progress Report 2014: http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era_progress_report2014/era_progressreport_150521.pdf
164
European Commission, COM(2013) 637 final. Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament:
European Research Area Progress Report 2013.

PE 581.382

106

European Research Area

(EARTO), European University Association (EUA), the League of European
Research Universities (LERU), NordForsk and Science Europe (SE).
The 2014 ERA Progress Report presents the new and update measures adopted at the
national level, and different from 2013 presents and compares them with the
implementation of ERA actions at the national level by research funding and research
performing organisations. For the RFO and RPO levels, no official statistical sources were
available. Therefore, the Commission launched the first ERA survey in 2012. However,
the responses were not sufficiently representative 165 (this is also the case for the second
ERA survey). Hence, the results presented in the Progress Report only provide an
indication of the situation among those institutions which responded to the survey. 166
In the annex of the 2014 Progress Report, a list is provided of 63 indicators that have been
agreed with Member States. The list also includes an assessment of all indicators, which
shows that a large part is not estimated and not included in the comparison of the
Progress Report. 35 indicators out of that list are included in the country snapshots or in
the country fiches167 (hence available at country level).

2.2

ERA Roadmap 2015-2020

For the new period 2015-2020, acknowledging that ERA implementation is an open-ended
process, meaning that implementation is a continuous process not reaching a final stage
of completion as new challenges and barriers arise on the way, the Council of the
European Union endorsed the ERA Roadmap 2015-2020 adopted by the European
Research Area and Innovation Committee (ERAC) on May 19 th 2015168. The purpose of the
Roadmap is to identify a limited number of key implementation priorities which are
likely to have the biggest impact on Europe’s science, research and innovation systems if
all the members of the ERA partnership get them right. This Roadmap identifies actions at
the national and European level, for each ERA priority.
The adoption of the ERA Roadmap also has consequences for the monitoring system of
ERA. The Roadmap, more than the 2012 Communication, explicitly recognizes the
differences between national research systems (whereas the Progress Reports were
criticized for having too little attention for national differences). This entails that the
Roadmap will have to be situated in national contexts and translated into national
roadmaps. The deadline for this voluntary commitment of Member States is May 2016.
With the Roadmap, the Member States are in the lead to define action plans according to
national priorities (in terms of objectives, actions, priorities, indicators, targets, deadlines).
In its Conclusions, the Council invites ERAC (European Research Area and Innovation
Committee) to propose by the end of 2015 a set of core indicators and, where appropriate,
qualitative methods allowing to monitor the implementation of the ERA Roadmap. It also
stresses that the Commission should consider integration of the monitoring of the
Roadmap into the 2016 Progress Report to avoid unnecessary administrative burdens.

165
Due to the voluntary nature of the 2014 ERA Survey, the figures are not representative and only relate to research
performing organisations that answered the Survey in 2014.This includes funders which manage 34% van GBOARD in the
EU, performers which employ 32% of total staff and 20% of researchers in RPOs. The constituency in the survey gathers
20% of the most important RPOs as identified by Member States.
166
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The Council And The
European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014,
167
The country fiches are available at http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/eraprogress_en.htm
168
Council of the European Union (2015) (8975/15). Draft Council conclusions on the European Research Area Roadmap
2015-2020 – Adoption. Brussels, 19.05.2015.

PE 581.382

107

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Within ERAC, a Working Group has been set up mandated with the task of identifying a
limited number of headline indicators. The set of indicators should show progress on
addressing the top implementation priorities identified in the roadmap. The aim is to
identify one indicator for each implementation priority (8 in total), as too many indicators
risks losing focus. The Working Group states that there will also need to be a more
detailed and sophisticated system for monitoring the full ERA agenda, which will
underpin future ERA Progress Reports. 169
In consultation with the European Commission and other experts, the Working Group
has drafted a proposal for this set of indicators170. The proposed indicators serve as a basis
for discussion. In their work the Working Group took into account the analysis and
suggestions included in the recently finished ICF study commissioned by DG Research
and Innovation171, which assesses the progress in achieving ERA in Member States and
Associated Countries. The document drafted by the Working Group provides a first
proposal of a set of detailed descriptions of indicators and the pros and cons for each
indicator. In the table below the proposed indicators are presented.
Table 1: Suggested Roadmap indicators ERA working group 172
Priority
PRIORITY 1
(Effective national
research systems)

Top Action Priority Roadmap
Strengthening the evaluation of research and innovation
policies and seeking complementarities between, and
rationalisation of, instruments at EU and national levels.

Indicator proposed
The proposed indicator is
EU Framework Programme
Funding per thousand Euro
GERD173,
expressed
in
percentage174

PRIORITY 2a
(Jointly Addressing
Grand Challenges)

Improving alignments within and across the Joint
Programming Process and the resulting initiatives (e.g. Joint
Programming Initiatives (JPIs)) and speeding up their
implementation.

Share of national GBARD175
allocated to Europe-wide,
bilateral
or
multilateral
transnational public R&D
programmes176

PRIORITY 2b:
Make optimal use
of public
investments in
Research
Infrastructures RI's

Making optimal use of public investments in RIs by setting
national priorities compatible with the ESFRI priorities and
criteria taking full account of long term sustainability

No indicator is proposed

Source
"Research
and
Innovation
performance in
the
EU:
Innovation
Union progress
at country level",
European
Commission,
Eurostat

“ERAC Working Group to discuss ERA Roadmap indicators”. http://era.gv.at/object/news/1842
Version 2 oct
171
ICF International (2015), Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and Associated Countries: final
report to DG Research and Innovation
172
ERAC working Group on ERA Roadmap indicators, Vienna Fiches 2015: https://era.gv.at/object/news/1842
169
170

173

GERD: Gross domestic expenditure on research and development

The Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development are the EU’s main instruments for
supporting collaborative research, development and innovation in science, engineering and technology. All member states
participate. The funding is on a competitive base and depends on evaluations. Numerator: total EU Framework Programme
funding in the country. Denominator: total GERD. The indicator does not prescribe an optimal percentage but suggests
rather a corridor of a typical ratio between EU and national funding. This means that both extreme ends of the graph are to
be avoided. Countries with a share of EU Framework Programme funding at the highest end might consider the potential of
substitution effects or an increasing dependency on EU funding instruments. Countries with a share of EU Framework
Programme funding at the lowest end might consider the better exploitation of unused national potential in EU competition.
175
GBARD (Government Budget Appropriations on Research and Development ) will be the new name of
GBAORD (Government Budget Appropriations or Outlays on Research and Development ) in the
forthcoming new edition of the Frascati manual.
176
National public funding to transnationally coordinated research is measured as the 'government budget appropriations or
outlays for research and development (GBAORD)' directed towards three categories of research and development (R & D)
performers and programmes: transnational public R&D performers located in Europe, Europe-wide transnational public R
& D programmes and bilateral or multilateral public R & D programmes established between Member State governments or
with EFTA and candidate countries. In the context of priority 2a it is most meaningful to include only the last two subclassifications. Numerator: GBAORD allocated to transnationally coordinated research. Denominator: Total GBAORD
174

PE 581.382

108

European Research Area

PRIORITY 3 (Open
Labour Market for
Researchers)

Using open, transparent and merit based recruitment
(OTM-R) practices with regard to research positions

ERA PRIORITY 4
(Gender Equality
and Gender
Mainstreaming in
Research)

Translating national equality legislation into effective action
to address gender imbalances in research institutions and
decision making bodies and integrating the gender
dimension better into R&D policies, programmes and
projects.
Fully implement knowledge transfer policies at national
level in order to maximize the exploitation of scientific
results. RPOs and RFOs should make knowledge transfer
second nature by integrating it in their everyday work.
At National level Member States and Associated Countries
should promote Gold and/or Green Open Access in line
with the Commission’s 2012 Recommendation on access to
and preservation of scientific information (covering both
scientific publications and research data). In particular, they
should ensure the further implementation of open access to
scientific publications by the most appropriate means in
their own research environment.
Develop and implement joint strategic approaches and
actions for international STI cooperation on the basis of
Member States' national priorities.

PRIORITY 5 a
(Scientific
knowledge transfer)
PRIORITY 5b
(Promoting Open
Access to scientific
publications)

PRIORITY 6
(International
cooperation)

Proportion
of
doctoral
candidates with citizenship
of another EU Member State
as a percentage of all
doctoral
candidates
(possibly also the share of
doctoral candidates from
non EU countries)177
Proportion of women A
grade in Higher Education
Sector (HES)178

Eurostat
data
(the share of
non-EU doctoral
candidates
is
also included in
the Innovation
Union
Scoreboard)
She
Figures
Study (managed
by DG RTD)

Public-private co-publication
per
million
of
the
population179

University
of
Leiden
(CWTS/Reuters)
and Eurostat
Science-Metrix

Proportion of Open Access
papers per country, 20082013180

International scientific copublications with non-EU
countries per million of the
population181

This indicator is
not
available
from
Eurostat
but
can
be
produced
through
the
existing
bibliometric
databases

These proposed indicators are meant to form the core system, embedded within a more
comprehensive system that will feed the progress reports. The following chapter will go
further into detail on this proposed system and its potential consequences.

177

Fairly self-explanatory; dividing the number of doctoral candidates in each Member State by the number of doctoral
candidates with citizenship of another MS
178
This indicator is available from the She Figures 2015 (expected e-publication in December 2015) and previous releases.
The She Figures 2018 should yield new data in 2018 (reference year 2016). Numerator: Number of women grade A in HES.
Denominator: Sum of number of men and women grade A in HES.
179
This indicator is published by Eurostat and is part of the Innovation Union Scoreboard (indicator 2.2.3.). It captures
public-private research linkages and active collaboration activities between business sector researchers and public sector
researchers which give rise to academic publications. Numerator: Number of public-private co-authored research
publications. The definition of the "private sector" excludes the private medical and health sector. Publications are assigned
to the country/countries in which the business companies or other private sector organisations are located. Denominator:
Total population.
180
The indicator shows the proportion of Open Access papers published in peer reviewed Journals at the European and
World levels over the period 2008 -2013 based on data from the Scopus database. Also a Composite indicator has been
developed to measure the growth of Open Access over the years 2011-2013 vs. 2008-2010. (based on a study by Science
Metrix RTD B6-PP-2011-2: Study to develop a set of indicators to measure Open Access).
181
International co-publications are an outcome of international STI cooperation. International scientific co-publications can
also be a proxy for the quality of scientific research as collaboration tends to lead to higher quality research as measured in
terms of citations. Numerator: Number of scientific publications with at least one co-author based outside of the EU.
Denominator: Total population (in million).

PE 581.382

109

Cost of Non-Europe Report

3. Assessment of ERA monitoring

Key messages




There are fundamental shortcomings related to the objective of monitoring:
establishing one set of indicators runs the risk of not capturing the high
level of heterogeneity in terms of objectives and interests; there is a lack of
entry points for mutual learning as well as incentives for governments to
take action.
There are technical shortcomings concerning the data collection and
presentation: availability of data is problematic and there are no baselines
or objectives to serve as a reference. Figures and data presented in the
Progress Reports are fragmented: they provide an insight on a detailed
level, but no overall overview.

The previous chapter provided an overview of the state of play of monitoring of ERA.
This chapter aims to critically reflect on the ERA monitoring mechanisms and deals with
the second research question: to what extent are the current monitoring mechanisms and
criteria in principal sufficient and detailed enough to assess the level of implementation of
the ERA infrastructure with regard to the five ERA priorities (in the pre-roadmap
period)? There are several reports and conclusions available that focus on the ERA
monitoring system182. Based on our own findings as well as these reports, it can be
concluded that the monitoring mechanism used for the 2013 and 2014 Progress Reports
were not sufficient to monitor ERA implementation to the extent to provide a basis for
national stakeholders to evaluate the progress in their country in relation to other
countries. In 2015, the Commission is working on improvements for the next Progress
Report, expected in 2016 (in the light of the ERA Roadmap).
The reasons for ineffective monitoring can be grouped as: 1) Fundamental shortcomings
related to the objective of monitoring; and 2) Technical shortcomings concerning the data
collection. These are discussed here below.

3.1 Fundamental shortcomings related to the objective of
monitoring
The ERA consists of a wide pallet of different objectives and priorities. Each priority
entails again another spectrum of sub objectives and potential policy options. For instance
in relation to priority 1 ‘More effective national research systems’, the 2012
Recommendation indicates two areas for work, namely allocating funding through open
calls for proposals; and assessing the quality of research-performing organisations and
teams and their outputs as a basis for institutional funding decisions. In addition, the
Recommendation acknowledges that the balance between these two approaches may
vary.183 This depends on what is most appropriate given the national research system; in
the two areas, Member States’ governments and other stakeholders can make different

182 Eg. ICF International (2015), Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and Associated

Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation; ERAC (ERAC 1201/14).ERAC Opinion on the European
Research Area Progress Report 2013. Brussels, 09-01-2014.
183
European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and
Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012

PE 581.382

110

European Research Area

and even opposing choices. Related to this, the different stakeholders, such as the national
governments, research performing organisations, research funding organisations can
have different interests and viewpoints on the ERA priorities and the directions it should
take. For example, universities are regarded within EMM with the same indicators as any
other research organisations, yet the academic nature of universities’ work suggests they
should have separate indicators for performance as they have to comply with other
(education-related and society-related (valorisation)) objectives as well. The ICF report
mentions that Member States criticize the current system for Progress Reports, as they are
not able to recognize the diversity of research systems and pathways to achieving ERA 184.
The Progress Report 2014 acknowledges that there is no one pathway for ERA
completion: “There is no single path to achieve ERA. The pace and level of ERA
implementation very much depends on the national context and is fostered by targeted
policies at Member States level”185 Establishing one set of indicators, as proposed in the
light of the ERA Roadmap, runs the risk of not capturing this high level of
heterogeneity in terms of objectives and interests.
In the Roadmap approach, MS have their own monitoring, this allows for a more place
specific measurement of compliance. The ICF analysis suggests that national roadmaps
can have added value to existing monitoring activities, if they have a common structure
(whilst allowing Member States flexibility in pace and scope of action). It is concluded
that any future integrated approach for the monitoring system should be built around a
core set of indicators with individual roadmaps, to allow for specific features of national
systems and national objectives.
The European Monitoring Mechanism (EMM) is designed, as both benchmarking
instrument and a tool for mutual learning. Stakeholders interviewed, but also the ERAC
secretariat, indicate that there is certainly room for improvement. The current monitoring
system only limitedly allows stakeholders to identify good practices in other countries
and hence it offers only few incentives for mutual learning. Self-assessment and
comparison with other countries can lead to three types of learning (see Visser and
Hemerijck 2001) namely, 1) learning through one’s own experience by conducting a (self)
assessment together with the national stakeholders; 2) learning from other country’s
experiences in how they have encountered challenging issues; 3) learning with others by
voluntary exchange of information and positions in decisional situations. The latter
proceeds on the assumption that frequent interaction can alter the preferences of member
states and thus enable joint decisions to be taken. 186
The second and third form of learning are especially needed in the ERA implementation.
Based on the interviews, the current monitoring system is felt not to provide these policy
learning forms in full: half of the respondents indicated that the monitoring system allows
national policy makers to learn from other countries’ solutions. The most common
mentioned function of the monitoring system is that it provides ‘an entry into another
country’s system’, after which further study is needed to transform the first entry into
policy learning. The Progress Report aims to provide a benchmark, yet, only partially

184
ICF International (2015), Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and Associated Countries: final
report to DG Research and Innovation.
185
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The Council And The
European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014, p.7.
186 The concept of deliberative learning was developed with the aim of preventing bottle-necks in production
and optimising processes at the plant level. By exchanging information, actors are able to check and adjust their
own decisions with regard to anticipated changes in the behaviour of other actors (Sabel 1994: 158). This school
of thought argues that these considerations can be transferred from business practice to governmental action
(“democratic experimentalism”, e.g. Dorf and Sabel 1998). Consulting, experimentation, the exchange and
pooling of information enlarge the scope for action and enable policy learning in the sense of pursuing common
goals.

PE 581.382

111

Cost of Non-Europe Report

succeeds due to the above mentioned issues. The mutual learning component gets very
little attention.
Furthermore, the current indicators do not encourage governments to perform better, as
they do not actually measure progress on an overall level. Some indicators are only
relevant for top performing countries, for instance. Several interviewees have mentioned
that there should be more focus on context, ‘the story’ and qualitative aspects, to get a
grasp on the impact of ERA actions. The focus on finding appropriate indicators seems to
have been too strong, whereas the contextual issues have gotten too little attention.
The ERA progress reports, in line with the 2012 Communication, speak about ERA
completion and ERA compliant. Different stakeholders, for instance the ERAC, in its’
Opinion on the 2014 ERA Progress Report, stipulates that ERA is an ongoing process
with many different stakeholders and decision-makers at multiple levels.187 Furthermore,
Science Europe speaks already in 2012 about “the philosophy of ERA is that it is evolving,
dynamic, flexible and creative; it is by nature something that will not, and should not, be
‘completed’.”188 This viewpoint of ERA as an ongoing or open-ended process, whereby
old problems are solved and new challenges arise is closer to the reality and puts more
emphasis on the necessity to acknowledge heterogeneity of ERA implementation
pathways and the need for effective policy learning between countries and with countries.

3.2

Technical shortcomings concerning the data
collection and presentation

On top of the fundamental shortcomings related to the objective of monitoring, presented
above, this section reveals certain technical shortcomings concerning the data collection
and presentation.
Securing robust information to support decision-making has proven difficult, as
availability of data is problematic. This resulted in an unstable set of indicators 189.
Besides EU-level monitoring system, only some countries also have national level
monitoring systems, whereas others have none. For instance, Austria has a very
comprehensive ERA dashboard, meant to keep track of all ERA development (not only
based on indicators, but also on input of different actors) 190. On the other hand, the Czech
Republic has no specific system to monitor ERA actions at the national level. The biggest
change the ERA Roadmap shows in comparison with the 2014 Report, is that only
existing data (eg. from JRC, Eurostat) will be used. Collecting data has proven to be too
difficult and costly. The ICF authors 191 suggest that the gaps in data availability show the
need for a more complete and comprehensive data collection from existing sources (rather
than entirely new data collection exercises).
In addition, and related to lack of available and reliable data, there are no baselines set
against which developments can be monitored, nor targets set against which the
progression can be tracked. The ERA priorities and objectives are not translated in
measurable targets for which indicators are developed. For instance, ’effective research
infrastructures’ involves the measure “to allocate funding through open calls for
proposals, evaluated by panels of leading independent domestic and non-domestic
187

ERAC (2014), ERAC Opinion on the 2014 ERA Progress Report 1213/14.
Science Europe (2012), Science Europe Statement on the European Research Area
189
ICF International,(2015), Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and Associated Countries: final
report to DG Research and Innovation
190
Part of the ‘ERA Observatory’: http://era.gv.at/directory/166
191
ICF International,(2015), Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and Associated Countries: final
report to DG Research and Innovation
188

PE 581.382

112

European Research Area

experts (peer review) - this incites researchers to reach internationally-competitive levels
of performance”. As such this is indeed recommendable, but the extent to which a MS
should apply project-based funding depends on many variables such as the extent to
which this is already good practice; whether the infrastructure is in place, and whether
the culture and mentality in research performing and research funding organisations is in
place to further develop this. Increasing project based funding can harm national research
infrastructures, especially in the newer Member States. For instance, a European
Commission study point to higher administrative burdens 192 and also the OECD indicates
that there are important downsides to project-based funding (see box below).
OECD (2011), ISSUE BRIEF: PUBLIC SECTOR RESEARCH FUNDING
“There is debate about whether the increasing reliance on competitive project or program
funding at the expense of block grant and long-term institutional funding has pressured
public sector research resulting in an emphasis on short-term, low-risk projects and away
from longer term fundamental research. There are also concerns about whether this
negatively affects an institutions’ capacity to invest in infrastructure. It is difficult to
balance performance-based funding approaches with giving autonomy and flexibility to
public research institutions.”193
As indicated, what would be a good outcome on an indicator depends on the country
specific context: what is good in one context, might be counterproductive for the research
system in another. This raises the question: what does it mean to complete ERA when no
targets have been set (for instance a specific level of project-based funding)? One of the
key conclusions of the ICF report on the current monitoring system is that success is
undefined. Within the Progress Reports, this absence of objectives has led to the use of
referencing Member State performance to an EU average. Yet, this approach doesn’t show
whether ERA has been completed.
This results as well in the assessment that the figures and data presented in the Progress
reports are fragmented: they provide an insight on a detailed level, but no overall
overview on the implementation of ERA. The reports do not include a general ranking of
countries for implementation of ERA, as a consequence of the fact that the differences
between countries are too big to make a useful comparison. The countries differ in their
starting positions, priorities set for the research system, prioritisation allocated to ERA
implementation, level of policy reforms and availability of monitoring data. The Progress
report 2014 classified countries on the basis of two indicators: “The first is the existence of
specific measures in support of ERA as identified by Commission services. The second is
the level of implementation by funders and/or RPOs in comparison with the EU
average.” The classification hence does not provide an overview of the overall
progression. The report continues by stating that “in the absence of targets or identified
desirable levels of implementation, it is difficult to identify and assess an adequate level
of ERA implementation for each of the actions.”194
Related to the different contexts in which ERA is being implemented in the countries; the
different policy choices made; and the need for collective learning on how to stimulate
further development of the ERA at national level, the nature of ERA implementation is
inherently qualitative (what, how), which makes quantifying (how many) whether
goals have been met difficult. Opening up research systems entails in the first place
European Commission — Directorate-General for Research (2008), Diversified Funding streams for University-based
research: Impact of external project-based research funding on financial management in Universities:
http://ec.europa.eu/invest-in-research/pdf/download_en/external_funding_final_report.pdf
193
OECD (2011), OECD Innovation Policy Platform ISSUE BRIEF: PUBLIC SECTOR RESEARCH FUNDING:
www.oecd.org/innovation/policyplatform
194
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 Final Communication From The Commission To The Council And The
European
Parliament.
European
Research
Area
Progress
Report
2014:
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/pdf/era_progress_report2014/era_progress-report_150521.pdf
192

PE 581.382

113

Cost of Non-Europe Report

removing barriers and providing incentives for research-performing organisations and
researchers to operate across borders (taking into account national priorities as well).
Although there is a call for more empirical data gathering by the ERAC secretariat, there
is also a need to provide better accessible qualitative information on policy developments,
policy initiatives, best practices at the level of research performing and funding
organisations. Quantification of progress based on indicators that do not do justice to the
complex reality of the ERA implementation could hide a lack of structural reforms as ad
hoc interventions might focus more on reaching results in relation to the indicators than
on reaching results in reality.
Moreover, the 2014 Progress Report and the data collection received criticisms by the
stakeholders.195 The survey conducted under funders and research-performing
organisations entailed a large administrative burden. Moreover, it was unclear at what
level to respond (some targeted organisations were umbrella organisations, which implies
they should speak on behalf of their members who were also consulted). Another related
key issue with respect to the Progress Reports is the voluntary nature of the RPO surveys.
These were not representative and therefore the results presented only provide an
indication of the situation of those institutions which responded to the survey 196.
Interviewed stakeholders indicated that before a next survey is launched, first a thorough
evaluation of the methodology, questionnaire, and targeting organisations needs to be
conducted.
The newly developed monitoring system for the ERA Roadmap, has some advantages
over the previous one in terms of having an overview by using a limited number of
indicators (importantly, only a limited number of indicators can be presented to ministers
in the political debate). On the other hand, there are a number of downsides:
o



Indicators do not do justice to complex reality: There is a substantial risk of
drawing conclusions on the basis of few indicators. There is a risk of using a system
what is not capable of giving an indication on overall progress as choosing 1
indicator may in certain cases be less than perfectly adapted to the Roadmap
priority they relate to and are at best proxies for measuring policy developments 197.
ICF also concluded that this minimalist selection of indicators has its problems: it is
difficult to represent in single, narrow indicators progress on very broad ambitions.
It is suggested that composite indicators could provide a better view, yet issues
with data availability suggest this is not feasible at present.
Two sets of indicator might create confusion: The proposed dual system (with
only eight indicators as the core message and a more comprehensive set of
indicators as the basis for Progress Reports) entails the risk that there will be two
separate monitoring mechanisms, making the exercise even more complex).

195

See: ERAC (ERAC 1201/14).ERAC Opinion on the European Research Area Progress Report 2013. Brussels, 09-012014
196
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 final. Communication From The Commission To The Council And The
European Parliament. European Research Area Progress Report 2014. (see footnote in chapter 2 for further explanation on
representativeness)
197
“ERAC Working Group to discuss ERA Roadmap indicators”. http://era.gv.at/object/news/1842

PE 581.382

114

European Research Area

4. Quantification of ineffectiveness of monitoring system

Key messages




Based on an indicative assessment, if the monitoring system allowed more
effective policy learning, the ERA implementation would have been further
developed. This difference in development is indicatively quantified as
being between 0 Euro and 3 billion Euro (mean of 1.5 billion Euro).
It should be noted that the in the scenarios expressed estimations should be
treated with caution due to the following reasons. Firstly, as argued earlier,
it is perhaps not right to speak about the completion of ERA as ERA
implementation is an ongoing process. Secondly, the contribution of
ineffective monitoring to the suboptimal level of implementation is not
quantifiable and hence the calculation replies on providing a bandwidth
and a mean.

After describing the state of play (chapter 2) and providing an assessment (chapter 3), this
chapter deals with the third research question: What are the costs incurred due to gaps or
barriers in the monitoring mechanisms as established by the Commission?
ERA is a dynamic and complex policy field, balancing national and European priorities,
involving different levels of stakeholders, combining different types and levels of funding
schemes. For this reason, implementing ERA needs to be accompanied by developing
new ideas, new ways to solve issues and alternatives to balance different priorities. This
involves the need to obtain new perspectives, new views, and reflections on how things
used to be arranged; in other words: policy learning. Policy learning is not an end in itself,
it serves to implement political programmes or in general terms to attain goals 198. In this,
monitoring is used as a diagnostic tool to assist national actors in improving performance
through learning.199
In this section, the research team tries to quantify the suboptimal implementation of the
monitoring system on ERA. This is done in a two-step approach: firstly, to estimate the

198 Hartlapp, M (2009), Learning About Policy Learning: Reflections on the European Employment Strategy; in:
European Integration online Papers (EIoP), Special Issue 1, Vol. 13, No. 7, 2009, p. 3-4.
199 Zeitlin, Jonathan (2009), The Open Method of Coordination and reform of national social and employment
policies: influences, mechanisms, effects, in: Changing European Employment and Welfare Regimes: The
Influence of the Open Method of Coordination on National Reforms; Edited by Martin Heidenreich, Jonathan
Zeitlin. See as well a presentation by Zeitlin: http://eucenter.wisc.edu/OMC/Papers/EUC/JZBamberg.pdf
Policy learning is one of the key mechanisms for change in the European governance model of Open Method of
Coordination (OMC). A critical consideration of the research literature on the OMC and policy learning reveals
no more than that changes have been taking place in Member States. And we know that there is a mode of
governance at the European level that allegedly prompts or facilitates learning processes (Hartlapp, M (2009),
Learning About Policy Learning: Reflections on the European Employment Strategy; in: European Integration
online Papers (EIoP), Special Issue 1, Vol. 13, No. 7, 2009, p. 3-4.). One of the key difficulties with OMC and
national impact is the under-specification of the mechanism underlying the change to be observed. In most
studies on the OMC, the relationship between an OMC procedure and change in national policies resembles a
black box (Many studies on the OMC assume implicitly or explicitly that the transfer mechanism in the black
box’ is learning (see López-Santana European Integration online Papers (EIoP), Special Issue 1, Vanhercke this
issue). “Its [OMC] real effectiveness and influence nationally is part of a collective learning process” (De La
Porte and Pochet 2002a: 13). Or “it organises a learning process in order to promote the exchange of experience
and best practice” (Regent 2003: 191). Although assessment of learning processes in the OMC has become more
sceptical over time, there is still a lack of systematic in-depth analysis showing that observable policy changes
are due to learning by actors or the overall political system.).

PE 581.382

115

Cost of Non-Europe Report

overall distance to the completion of ERA; and secondly, to determine the contribution of
the monitoring to the overall distance to the completion of ERA.

4.1

Estimate the overall distance to the completion of ERA

For estimating a distance to the completion of ERA, the only framework available is the
2012 Communication and the detailed Impact Assessment in which an annual benefit was
calculated for the completion of ERA of 16 billion Euro.
On the basis of the implementation study, it is estimated 200 that the distance to target to
the ERA completion is 19%. This means that the actions taken in the framework of the
ERA implementation by different stakeholders 201 led to completing the ERA for 81%.
When relating this to the estimated annual benefit of completing ERA from 2030 onwards,
as stated in the Impact Assessment202, the lack of full completion results in a lack of
annual benefit of roughly 3 billion (16 billion Euro * 0.19).
For attributing part of this annual loss to the lack of effective monitoring, a closer look is
given to how the monitoring system contributed to the ERA implementation. For this it
takes as reference whether the monitoring tool stimulates to policy learning and, through
this, leads to changes at national level. Our principal question hereby is whether progress
(measured by implementing more changes in policies) could have been more pronounced
if the ERA monitoring allowed a higher intensity of policy learning.

4.2

Determine the contribution of the monitoring to the
overall distance to the completion of ERA

As indicated in chapter 3 Assessment of ERA monitoring, the implementation of ERA
could have been more progressed if the monitoring system would allow more mutual
policy learning and learning from other countries. How much is difficult to assess. In any
case, the more effective monitoring would have affected each of the three conditions for
ERA implementation:
-

Condition 1: Member State reforms in all ERA priorities
Condition 2: Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the
Communication by research stakeholders
Condition 3: Increased support from the Commission to national ERA policies

The amount by which an effective monitoring system would have contributed is difficult
to assess on the basis of evidence and hence is prepared on the basis of a number of
assumptions. Through effective monitoring:
- the level of policy learning between Member States would have been at a higher
level (condition 1);
- sensible benchmarks would have encouraged Member States more to pursue the
ERA objectives (condition 1);
200

See for the methodology annex and the report on implementation of ERA.
Three conditions were taken into account (see annex): Condition 1: Member State reforms in all ERA priorities;
Condition 2: Speedy implementation of the priorities outlined in the Communication by research stakeholders; Condition 3:
Increased support from the Commission to national ERA policies.

201

202 Impact Assessment report (SWD (2012) 212 final), accompanying the document European Commission, COM
(2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels,
17.7.2012

PE 581.382

116

European Research Area

-

research stakeholders would through benchmarking have been encouraged to
pursue the ERA priorities (condition 2);
the European Commission would have been able to provide more tailored
support and assistance to further develop national ERA policies (condition 3).

Based on these assumptions, it is assumed that the impact of an effective monitoring
system on the implementation of ERA would have been considerable. With considerable
it is meant that Member States could have developed or implemented an additional
policy; more RPOs would have been ERA compliant and the European Commission
would have been able to implement (a few) more interventions as planned in the Impact
Assessment 2012. As the statement of ‘considerable’ is not quantifiable, three scenarios are
developed in relation to the quantitative impact of improved monitoring on the calculated
distance to target to the ERA completion which is 19%.
Scenarios
Scenario 1: The monitoring
reduced the distance to target
from 19% to 0%
Scenario 2: The monitoring
reduced the distance to target of
19% by half, resulting in a
distance to target of 9.5%)
Scenario 3: The monitoring had
no impact on the distance to
target and hence it remains at
19%

4.3

Quantification of the impact of an improved
monitorings system
0 Euro (16 billion Euro * 0.0).

1.5 billion Euro (16 billion Euro * 0.095).

3 billion (16 billion Euro * 0.19).

Caution when using the quantification

It should be noted that the in the scenarios expressed estimations should be treated with
caution due to the following reasons. First of all, as already stated at the beginning of this
report, it is more realistic to speak about ERA as an open-ended process instead of ‘ERA
completion’. As the calculations are related ERA completion, this gives the whole exercise
something superficial (This counts for the whole idea of completing ERA). Secondly, the
contribution of ineffective monitoring to the suboptimal level of implementation is not
quantifiable and hence the calculation replies on providing a bandwidth and a mean.
Here also other factors play a role (policy priority, government changes, socio-economic
situation, research infrastructures etc.). Again, be it shaky, it does provide a mirror to see
potential benefits of focussing more on mutual learning.

PE 581.382

117

Cost of Non-Europe Report

5. Improving the monitoring mechanism

Key messages




A future ERA monitoring system should acknowledge 1) that not one set of
indicators could capture the high level of heterogeneity in terms of
objectives and interests as expressed by different stakeholders; 2) the need
for increased possibilities for mutual learning; 3) the need for more
qualitative information about stages of development of policy development
and implementation; 4) that monitoring should be in line with the Roadmap
approach of creating ownership at national level; 5) the monitoring should
create incentives for governments and other stakeholders to act.
Based on this, the following recommendations are provided:
 Focus, besides the quantitative indicators, on qualitative policyrelated benchmarks as the ERA implementation is first of all about
removing barriers and creating favourable conditions.
 Set up an ERA policy index.
 Set baseline values and target values for specific indicators to allow
becoming visible progression and direction towards the agreed
objectives.
 Set up a system of self-assessment (associated with the Roadmap).
 Continue and intensify efforts for country peer reviewing and selfassessment as part of the Policy Support Facility.

In the current chapter, we address the final research question on how the monitoring
system could be improved. In this, we refer to the challenges and shortcomings of the
monitoring system identified in Chapter 3. Hereby, we follow the approach that ERA is
an open-ended process instead of something that can be completed. In Chapter 3, the
assessment identified a number of challenges. Based on these challenges, a future ERA
monitoring system could have the following key characteristics; it acknowledges:
1.

that not one set of indicators could capture the high level of heterogeneity in
terms of objectives and interests as expressed by different stakeholders (MS
governments, research performing organisations, research funding organisations,
European Commission);

2.

the need for increased possibilities for mutual learning in designing, developing,
implementing and evaluating ERA related policies and mechanisms;

3.

the need for more qualitative information about stages of development of policy
development and implementation;

4.

that monitoring should be in line with the Roadmap approach of creating
ownership at national level, allowing differentiated approaches and priorities set;

5.

the monitoring should create incentives for governments and other stakeholders
to act, including making clear where conflicting interest lie that could hamper
implementation.

PE 581.382

118

European Research Area

It should be emphasised that the Roadmap approach already takes into account the
majority of these key characteristics. However, to even better integrate these elements in a
future monitoring system, the following recommendations are provided:
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Focus, besides the quantitative indicators, on qualitative policy-related
benchmarks as the ERA implementation is first of all about removing barriers
and creating favourable conditions. Countries have heterogeneous objectives
and purposes for working on ERA. The Roadmap approach is supportive in this
direction, but the monitoring of the Roadmap might, if not accompanied by a
more qualitative and process oriented approach benchmark countries against a
limited number of indicators but portraying a realistic image of the country’s true
ERA implementation (in other words, more of a focus on the ‘story’ rather than
the quantitative state of play).
Set up an ERA policy index. This ERA policy index could consist of a small
number of key policy development areas, for instance associated with the ERA
priorities, on which a level of maturity can be identified. For instance a five-level
scoreboard203:
a. No system in place and developments are based on ad-hoc activities;
b. Dialogue between stakeholders is organised leading to first steps of
policy planning;
c. Break-even point: dialogue between stakeholders leads to results: policy
plans and programmes;
d. Implementation: policies and programmes are being implemented;
e. M&E, reviews, improvement: Results from independent evaluations or
peer reviews are shared with key stakeholders and recommendations
from evaluations and peer reviews feed back into further developments.
Set baseline values and target values for specific indicators. Setting these values
is much easier to establish for the ERA policy index than for the indicator set
established by the ERAC working group and in the ICF study. These indicators
serve a purpose when it comes to comparing the outcomes of the system, but do
very limitedly allow mapping progression. An ERA policy index on the other
hand better allows to see progression and opens possibilities to learn from other
countries’ initiatives. For instance if a country is assessed as starting the dialogue
(level 2) on ‘Scientific knowledge transfer’, it could learn from other countries
that are at level 3 as these countries already took the hurdle to commence
involving all relevant stakeholders in this area.
Set up a system of self-assessment (associated with the Roadmap). A key
strength of the Roadmap approach is that it is based on the country’s own
initiative. The countries could be provided with a template to base a selfassessment on a number of key assessment criteria related to the ERA priorities’
policy development, whereby stakeholders can score (based on evidence) the
country’s performance in terms of levels of maturity. This would allow countries
to identify areas in which they are strong and areas where they might be weak.
Continue and intensify efforts for country peer reviewing and self-assessment
as part of the Policy Support Facility. To further improve the mutual learning
experience, one could intensify peer review of self-assessments. In addition, one
could think of providing thematic evaluations, studies and conferences on
particular issues related to the implementation.

203
A similar principle was suggested by ICF, labelled ‘a traffic light rating system’ that could assess the performance for
ERA progress, and present it the form of three status categories. (ICF International,(2015), Assessment of progress in
achieving ERA in Member States and Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation)

PE 581.382

119

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Annex: Methodology and sources
Calculating distance to target
In order to answer the central question of this report, a distance to completion of ERA was
estimated. This annex aims to describe the approach taken to assess the level of
implementation, which is further presented in Panteia’s Research Paper on the
Implementation of an Integrated European Research Area.
The conditions for ERA 204 serve as a point of departure for establishing the distance to
target, in order to calculate the cost of non-implementation and ineffectiveness of the
monitoring system of ERA. The following table summarizes our approach for the
calculation, broken down by the 4 conditions

204

Identified in the 2014 Progress Report

PE 581.382

120

European Research Area

Condition
Condition
1:
Member
State
reforms in all
ERA priorities

Source
Overview of adoption of
measures since 2012 in
support of ERA
implementation,
included in the country
fiches (part of the ERA
Progress Report 2014) 205

Methodology and considerations
For all 5 priorities, it was assessed whether or not measures have been adopted by the Member
States. Hence, there are two possible outcomes: positive (one or more measures taken since 2012) or
negative (no measures taken since 2012). This was translated into a percentage: 0, 20, 40, 60, 80 or
100% (for 0-5 priorities in which measures were taken). For each priority, it was calculated which
percentage of the 28 Member States had adopted measures. On the basis of this, the EU average
was calculated (an aggregation of all priorities for all member states).
Considerations
If a country took measures, this entails that it has taken steps/reforms towards ERA. The difficulty
is that 1 reform since 2012 would be calculated as ‘target achieved’, thou gh the actual content and
weight of measures is not taken into account. Moreover, it is important to note that ‘no measures
taken since 2012’ could in practice mean that the necessary measures had already been taken prior
to 2012.

Condition
2:
Speedy
implementation
of the priorities
outlined in the
Communication
by
research
stakeholders

2014 Progress Report:
ERA compliance of
RPOs (p. 9)

Condition

2012 Communication:

3:

For establishing the distance to target for condition 2, the share of institutions, weighted by
number of researchers has been used. Three clusters are identified: ERA compliant, limited
compliance, ERA not applicable. The weighted share of organisations within the ‘ERA compliant’
cluster, has been used as the proxy for the level of implementation for condition 2.
Considerations
Due to the voluntary nature of the 2014 ERA Survey, the figures are not representative and only relate to
research performing organisations that answered the Survey in 2014.206
DG research has indicated which actions the EC has completed. The categories use d are:

205

http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/eraprogress_en.htm
This includes funders which manage 34% van GBOARD in the EU, performers which employ 32% of total staff and 20% of researchers in RPOs. The constituency in the survey gathers 20% of the most
important RPOs as identified by Member States.
206

PE 581.382

121

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Condition
Increased
support from the
Commission
to
national
ERA
policies

Condition
Transparent
monitoring
(EMM)

PE 581.382

4:

Source
actions defined (for each
priority) and
information provided by
the Commission (DG
Research and
Innovation, Unit ERA
policy) on actions taken.

Methodology and considerations
1 = not started
2 = ongoing process
3 = completed
On the basis of the information received from the Commission, the r esearch team has calculated the
level of implementation by assigning a percentage to each category (1 = 0%, 2= 75%, 3 = 100%).

Considerations
Using only three categories and assigning 75% completion to actions is of course a simplification,
which in some cases does not do justice to complex realities. However, as the taken actions are
often ongoing and in advanced stages, it is justified to give 75% to actions that are not completed
yet. As with the first condition of Member States, relative importance of actions is not taken into
consideration.
See next step – presented below.

122

European Research Area

Now that the approach has been described, we continue with the actual calculation.
The table below shows that every condition weighs for one third (as the final
condition is not taken into account here). It furthermore details the sublevels (for
condition 3) and the results of the calculation. All 5 priorities have been taken into
account for the calculation.

Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3

Condition 4
Level of
implementation
of ERA
Distance
to
target

Weight
33,3%
33,3%
33,3%

Sublevel weight

Priority 1: 20%
Priority 2: 20%
Priority 3: 20%
Priority 4: 20%
Priority 5: 20%

See next step – presented below.
100%

Result
81,4%
81%
Priority 1: 75%
Priority 2: 63,8%
Priority 3: 85,7%
Priority 4: 87,5%
Priority 5: 90,6%
Total average: 80,5%
Total average condition 1, 2, 3:
81%
100- 81 = 19%

Quantification of condition 4 (transparent monitoring)
The expected benefits from ERA amount to 16 billion annually207 and provide a basis for
calculating the missed annual benefits when combining it with the calculated distance to
target of 19%: 0.19 x 16 billion = € 3 billion.
Based on assumptions concerning potential impacts on the above mentioned conditions of
more effective monitoring, it is assumed that the impact of an effective monitoring system
on the implementation of ERA would have been considerable. In quantitative terms this is
proposed to be translated to an increased implementation level of 10 percent point as
estimated in the Study on the implementation of ERA (the implementation level would
have been 91% instead of 81%). The distance to target would have been 9% instead of
19%. In monetary terms this is expressed as a reduced annual benefit of 1.6 billion Euro
(10% of the 16 billion Euro as calculated in the Impact Assessment related to the
completion of ERA).

Selection of countries
Country case studies are a key part of this study. In order to make a selection of countries
that is as varied and relevant as possible, the classification from the 2014 Progress Report
was used. Within the progress report, two criteria were used to classify the countries
regarding to ERA implementation:

It should be noted the quantification does not critically assess the result from the impact assessment
calculating the 16 billion Euro annual benefit of ERA completion. It takes this calculation as a given.

207

PE 581.382

123

Cost of Non-Europe Report

3.
4.

Existence of specific measures in support of ERA (as identified by Commission
services)
The level of implementation by funders and/or RPOs (in comparison with EU
average).

On this basis, four possible groups are identified:
Figure A1: Classification of countries according to ERA policies and implementation of
the ERA Actions

Source: DG RTD
In the Progress Report 2014, it is stated that the results of the map imply that there is not a
single path to ERA: the implementation of ERA above the EU average is sometimes
directly driven by funders and RPOs (bottom up) and in some cases by national/regional
policies (top-down). The following map shows the classification of Member States:

PE 581.382

124

European Research Area

Figure A2: classification of Member States according to their policies in support of
ERA and their implementation

Taking into account the categories, as well as geographical range, we came to the
following selection of country studies:
- Austria (top-down)
- Czech Republic (limited implementation by stakeholders)
- Finland (bottom-up)

-

Portugal (limited measures and limited implementation)

PE 581.382

125

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Interviews
As part of the study, interviews were carried out with key stakeholders on both the EU
and MS level. Some interviews were done face-to-face or written, but most were
telephonic interviews. An interview script was developed for the semi-structured
interviews. All interviews were carried out between July 30 th, 2015 and September 28th,
2015.

List of interviewees:
EU level
Fabienne Gautier (DG Research and Innovation)
Arie van der Zwan (DG Research and Innovation)
Amanda Crowfoot (Science Europe)
Stephan Kuster (Science Europe)
Edward Ziarko (chair monitoring ERAC Working Group)
Lidia Borrél (EUA)
Austria
Christian Naczinsky (Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economy)
Andrea Höglinger (Austrian Research Promotion Agency-FFG)
Finland
Riitta Maijala (Ministry of Education and Culture)
Portugal
Vítor Corado Simões (JRC correspondent Portugal)
Ana Quartin (Foundation for Science and Technology, on behalf of ERAC delegation
Portugal)
Czech Republic
Martin Srholec (JRC correspondent Czech Republic)
Mikal Pazour (Technology Centre ASCR)
Lukas Levák (Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports)

PE 581.382

126

European Research Area

Bibliography
Council of the European Union (2014). European Research Area Progress Report 2014 –
Competitiveness Council Meeting. Brussels, 05.12.2014.
Council of the European Union (2015). Draft Council conclusions on the European
Research Area Roadmap 2015-2020 – Adoption. Brussels, 19.05.2015. (8975/15).
ERAC (ERAC 1201/14).ERAC Opinion on the European Research Area Progress Report
2013. Brussels, 09-01-2014
ERAC

Working

Group

to

discuss

ERA

Roadmap

indicators”.

http://era.gv.at/object/news/1842
European Commission — Directorate-General for Research (2008), Diversified Funding
streams for University-based research: Impact of external project-based research
funding on financial management in Universities: http://ec.europa.eu/invest-inresearch/pdf/download_en/external_funding_final_report.pdf
European Commission, COM (2000) 6 final - Not published in the Official Journal,
Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions of 18 January
2000: Towards a European research area.
European Commission, COM (2012) 392 final. A Reinforced European Research Area
Partnership for Excellence and Growth. Brussels, 17.7.2012
European Commission, COM (2014) 575 Final Communication From The Commission To
The Council And The European Parliament. European Research Area Progress
Report 2014.
European Commission, COM (2014), 130 Final/2. Annexes To The Communication From
The Commission To The European Parliament, The Council, The European
Economic And Social Committee And The Committee Of The Regions . Taking
stock of the Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth
European Commission, COM(2013) 637 final. Report from the Commission to the Council
and the European Parliament: European Research Area Progress Report 2013.
European Commission, COM, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (2015).
Horizon 2020: first results.
Hartlapp, M (2009), Learning About Policy Learning: Reflections on the European
Employment Strategy; in: European Integration online Papers (EIoP), Special Issue
1, Vol. 13, No. 7, 2009, p. 3-4.
ICF International (2015). Assessment of progress in achieving ERA in Member States and
Associated Countries: final report to DG Research and Innovation
OECD (2011), OECD Innovation Policy Platform ISSUE BRIEF: PUBLIC SECTOR
RESEARCH FUNDING: www.oecd.org/innovation/policyplatform
Republik Österreich (2011), Realising potentials, increasing dynamics, creating the future:
Becoming an Innovation Leader.

PE 581.382

127

Cost of Non-Europe Report

Science Europe (2012), Science Europe Statement on the European Research Area
Science Europe (2014). Science Europe Position Statement on Priority One of the 2012 ERA
Communication: More Effective National Research Systems.
Zeitlin, Jonathan (2009), The Open Method of Coordination and reform of national social
and employment policies: influences, mechanisms, effects, in: Changing European
Employment and Welfare Regimes: The Influence of the Open Method of
Coordination on National Reforms; Edited by Martin Heidenreich, Jonathan
Zeitlin.
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/eraprogress_en.htm
http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/partnership_en.htm
http://ec.europa.eu/research/index.cfm?pg=newsalert&year=2015&na=na-030315

PE 581.382

128

PE 581.382
ISBN 978-92-823-9109-9
DOI: 10.2861/895783
QA-02-16-304-EN-N
www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank (Internet)  www.epthinktank.eu (blog)  www.eprs.sso.ep.parl.union.eu (Intranet)

