Journal of European Public Policy

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rjpp20

Role of the state and responsibility in governing
artificial intelligence: a comparative analysis of AI
strategies
Christian Djeffal, Markus B. Siewert & Stefan Wurster
To cite this article: Christian Djeffal, Markus B. Siewert & Stefan Wurster (2022): Role of the state
and responsibility in governing artificial intelligence: a comparative analysis of AI strategies, Journal
of European Public Policy, DOI: 10.1080/13501763.2022.2094987
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.2094987

View supplementary material

Published online: 03 Aug 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 77

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjpp20

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.2094987

Role of the state and responsibility in governing
artiﬁcial intelligence: a comparative analysis of AI
strategies
Christian Djeﬀala*, Markus B. Siewert

b

* and Stefan Wurster

a,b

*

a

TUM School of Social Sciences and Technology, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany; bMunich School of Politics and Public Policy, Munich, Germany
ABSTRACT

Technologies based on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) represent a crucial governance
challenge for policymakers. This study contributes to the understanding of how
states plan to govern AI with respect to the role they assume and to the way
they develop AI in a responsible manner. In diﬀerent policy instruments
across 22 countries plus the European Union, there is considerable variation
in how governments approach the governance of AI, both regarding the
policy measures proposed and their focus on public responsibility. Analysing
a set of policy instruments we ﬁnd multiple modes of AI governance, with
the major diﬀerence being between self-regulation-promoting and marketbased approaches, and a combination of entrepreneurial and regulatory
governance approaches. Our analysis also indicates that the approach to
public responsibility is largely independent of the chosen policy mix of AI
governance. Therefore, responsibility seems to be a cross-cutting issue that
cannot be tied to a speciﬁc approach of states towards technology.
KEYWORDS Artiﬁcial intelligence; AI governance; policy instruments; state types; responsible research
innovation; technology assessment

Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) denotes a set of emerging general-purpose technologies.1 As such, it can have a variety of impacts that depend on future innovations and are, therefore, hard to foresee (e.g., Djeﬀal, 2020; Taeihagh, 2021;
Trajtenberg, 2019). Take the example of social media, which was hardly conceivable 20 years ago and is now widely driven by AI applications (Van Dijck,
2013). Through content moderation systems, AI has become the basis of
information for people all around the world, for private communication,
news consumption, and advertisement. At the same time, AI applications
CONTACT Markus B. Siewert
markus.siewert@hfp.tum.de
*All three authors have contributed equally.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2022.
2094987.
© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

2

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

can be used to hijack social media before an election by spreading fake news
to inﬂuence voter behaviour, whereas social media algorithms themselves
can create ﬁlter bubbles which are hotbeds of polarization, conspiracy theories, and hate speech (Chessen, 2017; Djeﬀal, 2019a; United Nations
General Assembly, 2019) and AI is again used to address these problems.
With AI fuelling democractic dreams as well as nightmares, proposals
about how to govern social media are hotly debated and range from selfregulation to (co-)regulation and even replacement by public agencies
(e.g., European Commission, 2020a).
The example above points towards the general quandary for policymakers
of governing AI (Taeihagh, 2021; Taeihagh et al., 2021; Ulnicane et al., 2020),
which is familiar with other emerging technologies (Kuhlmann et al., 2019;
Mandel, 2009). There are many reasons to support the development of AI,
as it holds vast promise for future economic growth, societal development,
and ecological progress (Bughin et al., 2019; Djeﬀal, 2019b; Khodabandeh
et al., 2020). Yet, AI has also caused concern due to recurring examples of discrimination, opacity, and accountability, as well as its increasing energy consumption, and its reinforcement of existing power structures within society
and the economy at large (e.g., Broussard, 2019; Crawford, 2021; Dauvergne,
2021).
In this paper, we explore how governments navigate the challenges of governing AI to fulﬁl goals like stimulating innovation, mitigating risks and assuming responsibility for the social impacts of AI, all at the same time. The main
questions in this regard are how governments and policymakers construct
the role of the state regarding technology governance and how they establish
public responsibility. Analysing the national AI strategies of 22 countries and
the European Union (EU), we examine the policy mix and regulatory regimes,
both regarding the types of policy instruments proposed and the approaches
taken to public responsibility. Our analysis oﬀers the ﬁrst systematic picture of
the level of activity, the state concepts derived from the policy measures proposed and the stance taken on public responsibility. Moreover, by bringing
together the literature on governance regimes (Borrás & Edler, 2020; Erdelyi
& Goldsmith, 2018; Mandel, 2009; Marchant et al., 2020) and responsible technology development (European Commission, Directorate-General for
Research and Innovation & Stilgoe, 2019; Felt & Wynne, 2007; Sarewitz,
2011; Stilgoe & Guston, 2017; ) – which have thus far been at the centre of
separate academic debates – we examine whether responsible AI governance
can be linked to the general approaches states take.
To address these questions, we ﬁrst clarify the main theoretical concepts
concerning the diﬀerent roles of states and their view of responsibility in
the context of AI governance. The next sections then present the empirical
ﬁndings concerning the policy mix and resulting state types, the uptake of
and diﬀerent approaches to responsibility, and ﬁnally the interrelationship

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

3

between the types of regulatory regimes and approaches to responsibility.
We conclude with an outlook on the impact of our ﬁndings concerning
future research on the governance of AI.

The role of the state and public responsibility in AI governance
Questions about the role of the state and responsible development are key
questions regarding the governance of any technology (Borrás & Edler,
2020; Kuhlmann et al., 2019; Simonis, 2013; Ulnicane et al., 2020). Building
on existing theoretical work, we conceptualize diﬀerent modes of technology
governance and public responsibility which will then guide our further
empirical analysis.

Deﬁning state roles in the governance of AI
The role of the state in the governance of AI, or any technology in general,
can be envisaged in diﬀerent ways (see for the following, Borrás & Edler,
2020; Erdelyi & Goldsmith, 2018; Gasser & Almeida, 2017; Kuhlmann et al.,
2019; Mandel, 2009; Marchant et al., 2020; Sarewitz, 2011; Ulnicane et al.,
2020). Conceptually, we distinguish two analytical dimensions: First, governments can play a proactive role in the development of AI technologies (strong
state intervention), or they take a more passive stance by stepping back and
giving private actors and/or the markets as much leeway as possible in the
governance of AI (weak state intervention). Second, governments can concentrate on regulating potential risks of AI technologies (enclosure-and-control
approach), or they can prioritise the deployment of AI and see their role primarily in promoting its development (stimulation approach).
As displayed in Figure 1, intersecting these two dimensions creates four
ideal-typical regimes of governance which diﬀer in the way that the state
assumes a diﬀerent role towards technology governance: (i) the entrepreneurial state, (ii) the market-oriented state, (iii) the regulatory state, and (iv) the selfregulation-promoting state.
Turning to the combination of a strong state which actively stimulates
the development and deployment of AI technologies, this state type
resembles Mazzucato’s (2011) notion of the entrepreneurial state. Contrary
to the small-state, free-market doctrine that often receives credit for a
country’s innovation performance, Mazzucato argues that public investments in innovation and technology, based on a proactive state as prime
risk taker, can result in high innovation performance. In line with the technology-push approach (Di Stefano et al., 2012), the entrepreneurial state,
therefore, stresses the role of public activities in fundamental research
by creating

4

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

Figure 1. Governance dimensions of AI and resulting state types. Note: Authors’ own
depiction.
a highly networked system of actors harnessing the best of the private sector
for the national good over a medium to long-term horizon. It is the state as catalyst, and lead investor, sparking the initial reaction in a network that will then
cause knowledge to spread. (Mazzucato, 2011, pp. 19–20)

From this perspective, it is the state which actively shapes the development
of technologies like AI, e.g., as initiator of research and infrastructure projects,
as promoter or co-designer of speciﬁc technical solutions, or as main customer and user (Borrás & Edler, 2020).
Juxtaposed regarding the extent of state intervention is the marketoriented state which relies on minimal state interference and soft regulation
which are usually non-binding or based on self-governance mechanisms
(Bisson et al., 2010; Kim, 2007). From this perspective, private actors, companies, and markets are the main drivers of technological innovation. Policymakers and governments, on the other hand, are depicted as being too
slow and lacking the expertise to make prudent decisions on highly technical
and complex topics like AI (Marchant & Wallach, 2013; Thierer et al., 2017).
Moreover, state-led regulations are frequently portrayed as inhibiting innovation through unnecessary red-taping, whereas state interventions – in
line with demand-pull approaches – are associated with ineﬃcient processes

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

5

and government failure. Applied to AI, the answer is a ‘light-touch approach’
(Thierer et al., 2017, p. 50) where the state is not completely inactive, but,
besides intervention in case of severe market failure, uses soft, marketfriendly governance tools to strengthen market processes and to create
leeway for private entrepreneurs to promote innovations in AI from the
private sector (Marchant et al., 2020; World Bank, 2021, p. 10).
The traditional regulatory state, in contrast, is mainly characterized by hard
governance instruments and direct interventions by the state (Braithwaite,
2011; Majone, 1997). By regulating innovations and technologies, the main
objective is to protect public goods and to ensure citizens’ safety. Accordingly, governments and policymakers not only step in once markets fail –
i.e., ex-post – but design ex-ante mechanisms in a proactive manner, and in
doing so, resume the regulatory authority of the state (Borrás & Edler,
2020; Mittelstadt, 2019; Nemitz, 2018).
The self-regulation-promoting state, ﬁnally, pertains to the idea that the
industry and other relevant stakeholders within a ﬁeld undertake collective
eﬀorts to regulate themselves and to impose self-restricting mechanisms.
The role of the state is thus limited to function as facilitator, observer, or
certiﬁer of private initiatives to regulate and govern AI rather than direct
engagement (Borrás & Edler, 2020). While the goal is risk prevention, this is
not achieved through direct state intervention but rather soft regulatory
instruments like ‘codes of conduct, organizational and technical industry
standards, quality seals and certiﬁcation bodies, ombudsmen and arbitration/mediation boards and ethic committees / commissions’ (Saurwein
et al., 2015, p. 40; similar Marchant et al., 2020, pp. 10–16).
Two conceptual notes are important here: First, the described governance
regimes are ideal types in the Weberian sense, which means that they are stylized abstractions which cannot be empirically observed in their pure form.
We use them as heuristics, and it is an empirical question how closely
actual governance arrangements ﬁt these ideal-types – a task which we
will take up below. Second and diﬀerent from the Weberian notion, we conceive of the two dimensions and four state types as not mutually exclusive.
For instance, governments can follow a self-regulation-promoting approach
regarding some issues of AI governance, while simultaneously showing a
strong entrepreneurial approach on others. Or a state’s approach might be
mainly characterized by a mix of entrepreneurial and market-oriented governance instruments (see section one of the online supplemental appendix
for an illustration of this reasoning).

Deﬁning approaches to public responsibility in AI governance
The question of what responsible technology development actually is, has
been discussed for decades with responsibility remaining a contested

6

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

concept. Questions of public responsibility are not a priori tied to the role of
the state since the latter does not capture to what extent governments and
policymakers assume responsibility for societal impacts. Several aspects have
been highlighted, such as expert assessments of technologies and knowledge production for decision makers (Brooks, 1976), participatory approaches
based on opinions, concerns, and ideas of ordinary users (Hennen, 2012;
Ornetzeder & Kastenhofer, 2012), procedural aspects highlighting anticipation and quickness (Guston & Sarewitz, 2002), or the progressive realization
of values through technologies (Felt & Wynne, 2007). These approaches in
scholarship are mirrored in developments and shifts in practice (Stilgoe &
Guston, 2017): The ﬁrst shift occurred in the 1970s, when technology assessment (TA; Hasselbalch, 2018) was institutionalized in the United States
through the creation of the Oﬃce of Technology Assessment in 1972, and
subsequently through similar institutions in many OECD member states
(Ely et al., 2014; Van Zwanenberg et al., 2009). As its main objective, TA
[…] should forecast, at least on a probabilistic basis, the full spectrum of possible consequences of technological advance, leaving to the political process the
actual choice among the alternative policies in the light of the best available
knowledge of their likely consequences. (Brooks, 1976, p. 20)

However, the general stance of TA was continuously challenged for
diﬀerent reasons (European Commission, Directorate-General for Research
and Innovation & Stilgoe, 2019; Stilgoe & Guston, 2017; Wynne, 1975),
such as its static and passive approach, the lack of participation, especially
by citizens and those aﬀected by the technologies. One alternative was
coined responsible innovation or as responsible research and innovation
(RRI). RRI was set out to provide a governance structure that addresses the
whole cycle of research, development and use of technologies and
inﬂuence governance in a more profound manner (European Commission,
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation & Stilgoe, 2019). Against
this backdrop, we can distinguish three general stances towards responsibility: deference of responsibility, an ‘orthodox’ approach to technology assessment, and responsible research and innovation.
Our research represents an attempt to decouple responsibility indicators
from speciﬁc technologies and to generalize them in a way that is applicable
to government strategies. Table 1 illustrates the three approaches which
display an increasing activity level regarding responsibility. While the
approach to defer responsibility contains no activity at all and is characterized
by the absence of instruments alluding to responsibility, the TA approach, on
the other hand, requires measures of states safeguarding social interests and
values. The RRI approach, ﬁnally, symbolizes the highest activity level and
contains all dimensions of responsibility. We further operationalize the
three approaches to public responsibility along the following four categories.

7

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

Table 1. Forms of responsibility governance.
Responsibility Dimensions
Form

Description

Implementation

Safeguarding Participation Proactiveness

Proactive and
Responsible
Actual
Yes
continuous allResearch and
implementation
Innovation (RRI) encompassing
with speciﬁc
eﬀorts for
measures
responsibility.
Orthodox
Flagging of
Rhetorical
Yes
Technology
responsibility issues implementation
Assessment
that are dealt with
without speciﬁc
(TA)
in the ordinary
measures
political process.
Deferral of
No speciﬁc mention No
No
responsibility
of responsibility
Note: Based on close reading of the literature cited in the main text.

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

The ﬁrst category is the degree to which responsibility is actually included in
the strategies. There are generally three options: to abstain from action, to
ﬂag an issue for further deliberation by the competent authorities, or to
implement ideas for a more integrated governance model with speciﬁc
measures impacting research, development, and implementation of technologies (Guston, 2014; Sarewitz, 2011). The second category is the aim of safeguarding in terms of rights, freedoms, and legitimate interests in society. The
third category concerns participation referring to the question of whether
those aﬀected by the technology have eﬀectively participated in the
context of policy instruments (Wilsdon & Willis, 2004). One of the main arguments here is to challenge the objective and neutral nature of expert statements as opposed to the views of those aﬀected by a technology. Diﬀerent
methods of participation integrate these views interactively and help to
gain a more complete picture of what the actual impacts of the technology
are (Fisher et al., 2006). The fourth and last category is the focus on the potential for value realization through technology, which we call proactiveness.
This dimension is speciﬁcally applicable in cases of general-purpose technologies like AI. It speaks to the possibility to guide innovation to realize other
values. As an attempt to govern emerging technologies in an all-encompassing manner, RRI has worked towards governing innovation to realize values
directly (Felt & Wynne, 2007).

Technology governance through government strategies
The governance of AI is occupying more and more space on the political
agenda with governments and policymakers at the national and international level actively devising AI strategies in which they set out their
goals regarding the governance of AI and the means to achieve them
(Fatima et al., 2020; Radu, 2021; Ulnicane et al., 2020). As a form of

8

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

‘meta-governance’, governmental strategies fulﬁl several functions, of
which two are particularly important for this study (Casado-Asensio &
Steurer, 2014; Rayner & Howlett, 2009). First, they can be used to
deﬁne core objectives regarding the future deployment of AI. In doing
so, governments point out issue areas and priorities for which they
plan to build up necessary capabilities to be at the vanguard of the AI
revolution. Moreover, they lay down the respective measures and mechanisms concerning how they want to achieve these goals. Second, government strategies signal commitment to diﬀerent (groups of)
stakeholders which are part of the AI ecosystem. This signalling pertains
to the formulation of and adherence to certain norms, values, and standards, but also the question of responsible development of AI in collaboration with other societal actors. By analysing oﬃcial AI strategies, we
thus gain insights into how governments and policymakers envisage
and design the role of the state in steering of AI-based technologies
and the responsibility of the state towards society and its citizens.
Our empirical analysis is based on the tracking of policy instruments in
national AI strategies from 22 countries plus the EU.2 We conducted a
qualitative content analysis to identify relevant policy instruments
deﬁned as any means, techniques, or mechanisms by which the government aims to achieve its AI-related policy objective (Hood & Margetts,
2007; Howlett, 2019). A team of trained research assistants together
with the authors screened all documents and manually coded respective
policy measures to capture the type of instrument used and its reference
to responsible development of AI (for further information on the codebooks including a detailed description of the coding procedure, please
see section three, four and ﬁve of the online supplemental appendix
Section six and seven of the online supplemental appendix display the
raw data). In sum, we identiﬁed 1.829 individual policy measures across
all 23 governmental AI strategies under study, which means, on
average, 79.6 instruments per AI strategy. Since each measure can theoretically include more than one instrument, the overall number can be
higher if we look at types of policy instruments.

The role of the state in AI governance
Looking at national AI strategies, which policy instruments do governments
use and what role of the state is conveyed regarding the governance of AI?
We ﬁrst examine how active a state is concerning the governance of AI
and what types of instruments are most prominently employed. Building
on this descriptive picture of policy instrument usage, we can then systematise the instrument toolkit by empirically tracing the theoretical state types
developed above (revisit Figure 1). Taken together, this oﬀers a systematic

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

9

picture on the modes of governance and emerging regulatory regimes as
they are portrayed in AI strategies.

Governance of AI: level of activity and policy instrument use
The number of policy instruments is a measure for the level of activity (see
Knill et al., 2012; Schaﬀrin et al., 2015 in the context of energy policy). On
average, we ﬁnd 83.7 policy instruments per AI strategy, though the level
of activity in governing AI varies considerably between countries: China is,
by far, the most active state with 219 instruments, followed by Japan (164)
and the Republic of Korea (114). All three countries have in common that
they are at the vanguard of the digital transformation and early adopters
of AI (OECD, 2019). Yet, this does not seem to be a necessary condition
since Hungary (135), the Czech Republic (103), or Cyprus (101) show a high
level of activity, too; although they are currently ranked at the lower end in
digitalization indices (European Commission, 2020b). Austria (10), Sweden
and France (both 21) show comparatively low levels of activity, which is surprising for Austria and Sweden, as both countries usually count as prime
examples of active states.
Table 2 gives an overview on the toolkit that is used in the governance of
AI based on nine instrument subtypes within the four categories of authority,
ﬁnance, organization, and information (Hood & Margetts, 2007; Howlett,
2019; see section two and three of the online supplemental material for
the codebook and a detailed description of the types of instruments, how
we deﬁned and coded them).3
The largest category, by far, are ﬁnancial instruments with a total of 941
policy measures, including both public investments and ﬁnancial incentives.
Direct public investments (816 policy instruments) into AI infrastructures or
government-funded programmes in areas like education, health or public
Table 2. AI governance policy toolkit per country.

Notes: Data based on a qualitative content analysis of 23 governmental AI strategies. See also section
four and six in the online supplemental appendix. The percentage values indicate the ratio of policy
instrument types per governmental strategy, whereas absolute numbers are given in italics at the
upper and right end of the table. For instance, out of the 55 instruments identiﬁed in the AI strategy
of Lithuania, 12.7% refer to outreach and literacy. Red highlighting of percentages signals outlier
cases whose ratio of instruments lies 1.5 standard deviations or more above the mean for the
instrument use (row percentages).

10

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

administration massively dominate, whereas incentive-based ﬁnancial instruments (125) like tax breaks to increase research in and the uptake of AI or vouchers for vocational training and further education are only rarely mentioned.
While tools of public investments thus play a large role in all AI strategies,
they are especially prominent in China, Japan, and Korea, but also Austria
and Portugal. The AI strategies of Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Malta, and
Estonia, on the other hand, are characterized by a comparatively large
number of incentive-based instruments which is (almost) double the
average across all strategies.
The category authority, comprising direct regulations as well as governmental strategies, includes 304 policy instruments. Here, hard measures
such as laws, directives, and other regulatory tools (158) are as
common as soft measures including policy guidelines and frameworks
(146). Prominent issues addressed via direct regulation are, inter alia,
immigration laws to attract skilled labour, threats related to cybersecurity,
or issues related to data protection. Moreover, ﬂexible tools of governance like regulatory sandboxes to test and, if necessary, update existing
legislation are also frequently mentioned. Looking at the national strategies more closely, we see that countries like France and the Czech
Republic, but also Indonesia and Russia predominantly propose direct
regulations. Non-binding government arrangements or the commission
of strategic planning documents, frameworks, and guidelines, on the
other hand, make up a large proportion of the national AI strategies of
Norway, Denmark, and the United States.
A total of 298 instruments refer to organizations, covering networks and
other institutions. These instruments pertain to the establishment of networks (154) to facilitate dialogue and collaboration between relevant stakeholders via hubs, hackathons, or other public-private fora, as well as the
creation of institutions (144) like ethic councils, advisory boards, or governmental steering groups on AI. Networking instruments are prominent in
Sweden and the Czech Republic, while the AI strategies of Germany,
France and the EU include many instruments with the goal of setting up
formal institutions.
Finally, we found 332 informational instruments, which include the three
subcategories data and monitoring, certiﬁcates and labels, as well as outreach
and literacy measures. Here, the largest subtype refers to data gathering and
monitoring (187), a set of tools whose main purpose is to collect, monitor,
analyse, and share and analyse data on AI-related trends and developments.
Looking at diﬀerences between national AI strategies, it becomes apparent
that such tools are especially important in the United States. Public outreach
measures (82), on the other hand, include AI literacy programmes for the
public at large or speciﬁc segments of it, as well as public information campaigns to raise awareness for and increase trust in AI-based technologies.

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

11

Instruments like these are prominently featured in the AI strategies of the
Baltic states like Lithuania and Estonia, but also Malta. Measures aiming at
the self-regulation of businesses as well as informational tools for consumers
are categorized as certiﬁcates, standards, and labels (63), and are frequently
mentioned in the AI strategies of France, Austria, and Indonesia.
In sum, this ﬁrst descriptive account highlights the variance in the level of
activity and the policy mix across the analysed AI strategies. For a more systematic analysis of the respective governance regimes, we next turn to the
exploration of state types.

State types in the governance of AI
Given that governments adopt a comprehensive AI strategy, what mode of
governance and resulting state types can we identify?4 To address this question, we empirically map the four ideal-typical state types, i.e., the entrepreneurial state, the market-oriented state, the regulatory state, and the selfregulation-promoting state. Table 3 gives an overview how we operationalize
each state type (revisit Figure 1) based on the mix of policy instruments we
expect it to display (for the following, we draw on Bisson et al., 2010;
Borrás & Edler, 2020; Marchant et al., 2020; Saurwein et al., 2015).
AI governance arrangements in line with the entrepreneurial state
includes an above average number of instruments related to governmental
strategies, direct public investments, network building as well as public outreach and literacy. The market-oriented state, in contrast, largely refrains from
proposing direct regulations or making direct public investments. This,
however, does not imply a total waiver of state involvement. Instead, we
Table 3. Expected policy instrument mix of the four state types.
Dimensions
Authority
Direct regulations
Governmental
strategies
Finance
Public investments
Financial incentives
Organization
Institutions
Networks
Information
Data & Monitoring
Certiﬁcates & Labels
Outreach & Literacy

Entrepreneurial
state

Market-oriented
state

Regulatory
state

Self-regulationpromoting state

neutral
high

low
neutral

high
neutral

low
low

high
neutral

low
high

neutral
neutral

low
neutral

neutral
high

neutral
neutral

high
low

low
high

neutral
neutral
high

neutral
high
neutral

high
neutral
neutral

neutral
high
neutral

Notes: ‘High’ indicates that we expect a high number of policy instruments to be generic for the respective state concept; ‘low’ indicates that we expect a low number of policy instruments to be generic for
the respective state concept; ‘neutral’ means that we do not have clear theoretical assumptions, i.e., it
can be both high or low numbers of policy instruments.

12

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

assume the facilitation of a conducive AI ecosystem via market-friendly instruments including incentive-based ﬁnancial instruments in combination with
soft measures like voluntary standards, certiﬁcates, or labels. The regulatory
state is characterized by an above average number of laws and other forms
of hard regulation as well as the creation of institutions like oversight
bodies. Additionally, data collection and monitoring instruments should
play an important role, whereas networking tools should be underdeveloped.
Finally, the self-regulation-promoting state is constituted by an above
average use of instruments related to networks and certiﬁcates and labels
to make private engagement visible, while stepping back from direct regulations, government strategies and public investment programmes.5
Table 4 and Figure 2 present the results of a fuzzy-set ideal type analysis
(Fiss, 2011; Kvist, 2007; detailed in section eight of the online supplemental
appendix). It provides us with ‘a calculus of compatibility’ (Kvist, 2007,
p. 474), or in other words, the proximity of the theoretically deﬁned state
types with the empirically observed patterns in AI governance. The higher
the values, the stronger the aﬃnity. Thirteen national AI strategies are connected to the concept of the entrepreneurial state. Japan, China, and the
Republic of Korea display a strong aﬃnity to the entrepreneurial state, but

Table 4. State type characteristics of AI strategies.
Country
AUT
CHN
CYP
CZE
DNK
EST
EU
FIN
FRA
DEU
HUN
IDN
JPN
LIT
LUX
MLT
NLD
NOR
PRT
RUS
KOR
SWE
USA

Entrepreneurial
state

Market-oriented
state

Regulatory
state

Self-regulation-promoting
state

0.03
0.53
0.25
0.68
0.71
0.50
0.75
0.25
0.74
0.37
0.62
0.41
0.59
0.43
0.69
0.47
0.48
0.24
0.57
0.22
0.59
0.54
0.25
0.50
0.20
0.50
0.51
0.47
0.73
0.49
0.62
0.43
0.04
0.55
0.33
0.65
0.75
0.34
0.63
0.43
0.79
0.40
0.76
0.45
0.40
0.39
0.90
0.29
0.79
0.50
0.30
0.62
0.41
0.54
0.49
0.60
0.54
0.54
0.35
0.55
0.72
0.31
0.80
0.24
0.76
0.47
0.73
0.34
0.58
0.45
0.81
0.36
0.33
0.38
0.26
0.56
0.10
0.61
0.43
0.68
0.73
0.42
0.54
0.35
0.10
0.53
0.18
0.72
0.31
0.58
0.38
0.57
Notes: Values of 0.85 or higher signal a very strong aﬃnity with the respective state type; values between
0.84 and 0.70 reﬂect a strong aﬃnity; values between 0.69 and 0.55 reﬂect a stable but weak aﬃnity;
values between 0.54 and 0.51 display an unstable aﬃnity; values below 0.5 should be interpreted vice
versa.

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

13

Figure 2. State type characteristics of AI strategies.

also several northern and central European countries like Finland, Netherlands, Germany, or Hungary. Malta and Cyprus also ﬁt well, whereas
Estonia, the Czech Republic, Luxembourg, and Norway show only a weak
aﬃnity. Eight AI strategies, i.e., Austria, Estonia, France, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Russia, Sweden, and the United States, are linked to the marketoriented state. The proximity, however, is much lower with Russia (value of
0.61) and USA (0.58) showing the highest aﬃnity. From the thirteen states
that are linked to the regulatory state, Indonesia (0.90) stands out as
having a particularly strong resemblance, trailed by the AI strategies of
Norway, Malta, Hungary, and China. Finally, nine states can be characterized
as self-regulation-promoting states, with Sweden, but also Austria, Russia,
and France showing the closest resemblance to this state type.
Looking at these empirical patterns of AI governance state types, several
points are particularly worth pointing out. First, our results indicate that
state approaches to AI governance indeed resemble our theoretically
deﬁned state concepts since all governmental strategies exhibit a high
resemblance with at least one state type. Critical cases are Luxembourg
and the European Union which show only weak relations to their respective
state types. Second, it strikes the eye that only a few governmental AI strategies belong to one state type: Among the four states with a unique AI
approach (Indonesia, Denmark, EU, and Portugal), Indonesia stands out
with its clear strong regulatory approach towards AI. Third, and this is the
mirror-image, empirical reality is characterized by a mix of governance
approaches. In particular, we observe that the market-oriented state frequently goes hand in hand with the self-regulation-promoting state (in six
cases), whereas the entrepreneurial state often coincides with the regulatory
state (in ten cases). This indicates that the conceptual divide is between the
market-oriented and self-regulation-promoting approach, on the one hand,
and the regulatory and entrepreneurial approach, on the other.

14

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

In sum, a dominant group of countries is signalling in their strategies that a
proactive state should do both, promote, but also regulate AI-related aspects.
Although dimensions are not balanced since some countries have a closer
proximity to the entrepreneurial state, while others have more in common
with a regulatory state,6 we interpret the prominence of this combination
as a sign that for a large subset of AI governance arrangements in our
sample both aspects of guarding and facilitating are crucial and that the
state’s role here is seen as both the protector and the producer of collective
goods.

Public responsibility in policy instrument use
AI strategies also reveal the stance which policymakers take concerning
public responsibility. This topic is not necessarily tied to one of the state
types. Therefore, we determined the general stance of each state towards
responsibility before looking at the relationship between state types and
responsibility

Public responsibility in AI governance: level of activity and
instrument use
The analysis of policy instruments reveals where the states stand between
orthodox TA and RRI. The overall number of RRI instruments is higher, than
TA which means that this approach has become more important as
opposed to orthodox TA. While there is no complete deference of responsibility, the data clearly shows that in all countries the majority of instruments
have no direct link to public responsibility.
Table 5 presents the data on policy instruments that address the responsible governance of AI (see also section ﬁve and seven in the online supplemental appendix). All in all, 400 out of the 1.829 instruments relate to
responsibility; in other words, more than one-ﬁfth of all policy measures
(21.9 per cent) contain a reference to a responsible governance of AI. There
is, however, considerable variation regarding the stance of states towards
responsibility. In particular, states like Germany and Lithuania followed by
the Scandinavian countries Denmark, Finland, and Norway and the EU, Luxembourg and the Netherlands stand out with 30 per cent to 40 per cent of
its policy instrument mix showing a reference to responsibility. At the other
end of the spectrum, we ﬁnd Russia, Estonia and Hungary, Cyprus, Indonesia,
and Japan which show a below-average activity when it comes to highlighting some form of responsible governance (see row ‘responsibility’ in Table 5).
In sum, states seem to have quite diﬀerent views to what extent responsibility
needs to be ensured in the governance of AI.

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

15

Table 5. Policy instruments with responsibility reference.

Notes: Data based on a qualitative content analysis of 23 governmental AI strategies. See also section
ﬁve and seven in the online supplemental appendix. The percentage values indicate the percentage
of measures with diﬀerent forms of responsibility assignment per governmental strategy, whereas
absolute numbers are given in italics at the upper and right end of the table. For instance, out of the
49 instruments identiﬁed in the AI strategy of Lithuania, 42.9% contain a reference to public
responsibility. Moreover, 34.7% of all instruments in the national AI strategy of Lithuania fall
into the category of RRI and 8.2% into the category of TA Red highlighting percentages signal
outlier cases whose ratio of instruments lies 1.5 standard deviations or more above the mean
for the instrument use (row percentages).

States show very diﬀerent levels of activism concerning the implementation of responsibility. They also diﬀer regarding whether they lean
towards an orthodox TA approach or an RRI approach (see rows ‘technology
assessment’ and ‘responsible research & innovation’ in Table 5). One interesting observation in that regard is that some states have (almost) no instruments that can be categorized as orthodox TA. For Austria, Denmark,
Estonia, Russia, and the Republic of Korea no instrument refers to TA, while
China, the Czech Republic, Germany, the EU, Japan, and Malta are all below
5 per cent. The ratio of instruments that are devoted to an RRI approach compared to instruments that warrant a TA approach is 311 to 89. We can thus
infer that most states treat AI governance as a task that needs active
approaches to ensure responsibility. However, there is a group of states
like Norway, Sweden, and the United States having an even balance
between TA and RRI instruments.
Looking at the dimensions more granularly (see respective rows in Table
5), it stands out that states view the topic of participation very diﬀerently.
While there is a large group for which participation plays (almost) no role
including China, Estonia, Japan, Russia, and Sweden, most states can be categorized around the mean of 4.7 per cent. Lithuania, Germany, Finland, and
the EU display a high ratio of participatory instruments. Participation
measures include questions like creating a public debate through organizations (Norway, 2020, p. 60), or to focus on employers and employees
(Czech Republic, 2019, p. 30). The most relevant dimension is the goal of safeguarding values with 12.7 per cent of all instruments. These instruments often
relate to regulation pointing to ‘deﬁned rights and responsibilities’ (United
Kingdom, 2018, p. 16) or ‘innovative regulation in the context of data marketplaces in order to increase legal certainty and transparency’ (Luxembourg,
2019, p. 19).

16

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

There is a tension between the dimensions of safeguarding and proactiveness, since the former aims to protect values in the use of AI for other purposes, while the latter assumes that AI is used for the realization of ethical,
legal, and social values. The dimension of proactiveness comprises 130
measures (7.1 per cent). While this is less than the dimensions of safeguarding, there is a group of states in which proactive measures almost equal safeguarding measures such as China, Luxembourg, and Malta. Goals of proactive
realization include the ‘quality of urban life and the productivity and safety of
the construction industry’ (South Korea, 2019, p. 40), or ‘early warning programs for energy resource consumption and environmental pollutant discharge‘ (China, 2017, p. 20).

Linking public responsibility and state types in AI governance
Finally, we are interested in the question whether the diﬀerent state types
and regulatory regimes also imply speciﬁc notions of public responsibility?
Concerning the expected relationship, we can formulate the following
hypotheses (based on European Commission, Directorate-General for
Research and Innovation & Stilgoe, 2019; Stilgoe & Guston, 2017; Wynne,
1975): For the marked-oriented state, we assume that its orientation
towards weak state intervention will result in a deferral of responsibility.
The self-regulation-promoting state ﬁts either with a deferral of responsibility
or a TA approach. Conversely, it would be possible that entrepreneurial states
take a proactive approach regarding responsibility with a strong RRI
approach. However, since they have an active interest in advancing technology and are themselves drivers of technological development, one could also
expect that they defer responsibility. Concerning the regulatory state, we can
assume that it has a high level of responsibility, however here the question is
whether we deal with a TA or an RRI approach. It could be argued in favour of
a combination with TA which tends to rely on the ordinary processes in government and, therefore, is only in need of a general assessment of the technology. However, the impetus to regulate might also motivate those states to
engage deeper into the governance of technologies and to employ an RRI
approach.
To shed light on possible linkages, we correlate the four state types with
the diﬀerent dimensions of responsible AI governance (see section eight in
the online supplemental material). In sum, the results show – contrary to
our theoretical expectations – rather low (or no) correlations between state
types and the uptake of responsibility. This applies in particular when we
look at the relative shares and not at the absolute numbers of responsibility
instruments in an AI strategy. Regarding the absolute numbers of responsibility instruments, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant positive relationships with entrepreneurial
and regulatory state types. This is not only true for the total number of

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

17

responsibility instruments, but also if we look at the absolute numbers of
instruments for the subcategories safeguarding, responsible research & innovation (RRI), proactiveness (only for entrepreneurial states) and technology
assessment (TA, only for regulatory states). While participation instruments
are in no signiﬁcant relationship to any of our identiﬁed state types, we
also ﬁnd no signiﬁcant positive correlations of states with a market-oriented
or self-regulation-promoting approach and any dimension of responsibility.
For the absolute numbers of instruments and the subcategories safeguarding, proactiveness and RRI we ﬁnd signiﬁcant negative correlations with a
self-regulation-promoting state. If we consider the percentage of responsibility instruments per strategy, we only ﬁnd signiﬁcant (positive) correlations for
instruments associated with proactiveness and entrepreneurial state types.
Since the correlations are rather weak and apart from proactive instruments and entrepreneurial state orientation not robust, we interpret these
ﬁndings with caution. One interpretation would be to associate entrepreneurial states with RRI, regulatory states with orthodox TA and market
oriented and self-regulation promoting states with deference. The fact that
there is no strong relation also shows something else. Other than commonly
assumed, we ﬁnd responsibility to be a crosscutting topic that is not tied to
any state type. This narrative would reinforce that all states promote responsibility, but they pursue this aim through diﬀerent means.

Conclusion
The analysis of AI strategies allowed us to reconstruct how governments and
policymakers view their role regarding technology and public responsibility
for AI-based technologies. We have shown that there is considerable variation
in how states approach the governance of AI concerning the level of activity
and the particular policy mix, both regarding the policy instruments proposed and the focus on responsibility.
One of our main ﬁndings is that we see a major diﬀerence between states
which follow a marked-oriented and/or self-regulation-promoting approach,
on the hand, and a group of countries which combine both entrepreneurial
and regulatory governance approaches, on the other hand, with some
countries showing a closer aﬃnity to one type than the other. This key
ﬁnding qualiﬁes dominant narratives in public and political debates which
frequently paint a picture according to which policymakers have to choose
between the promotion of emerging technologies or the regulation of corresponding risks. At least for the ﬁeld of AI, the majority of governments
demonstrate the willingness to do both. Instead, we ﬁnd a central watershed
between active states and those that hold back from state interference. To
what extent this pattern also applies for other emerging technologies is of
central importance not only from an empirical perspective but also further

18

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

theory development. It points out that the dimensions of active versus
passive states should be put more at the centre of the governance debate
on emerging technologies. In contrast, the distinction between regulating
and furthering technologies is less relevant.
We ﬁnd in our analysis that the topic of public responsibility is not tied to
any speciﬁc state type. It is therefore an independent topos of politics and
technology irrespective of how governments approach technology. The
level of engagement of AI strategies in instruments promoting responsibility
varies substantially. However, all strategies include some form of responsibility. Building upon the respective discourses especially in STS, we ﬁnd that RRI
is a much more common form of governance towards AI than orthodox TA,
highlighting the fact that governments take participatory and proactive
actions seriously when thinking about the implementation of responsibility.
Our study has several limitations that indicate important future research
avenues. First, with more and more countries passing national AI strategies, it
will be crucial to enlarge the sample, particularly including more countries
from the Global South. Second, we have only focused on the number of
policy instruments mentioned in AI strategies. While this is an important ﬁrst
step to get a more systematic and evidence-based picture on the emerging governance of AI-based technologies, the next generation of research needs to
expand this, for instance, by looking more closely at the issue areas that have
been addressed, whether some instruments come with more commitment,
resources etc. than others, whether certain mixes of policy instruments are
used for speciﬁc problems. Third, our analysis is limited to the stage of policy formulation, which could be expanded both backward and forward along the
policy process. Future studies will need to examine the implementation of the
policy measures and whether these have an eﬀect on AI-related policy outcomes. To this end, we also need to assess AI governance structures and ecosystems in a more comprehensive manner by looking beyond AI strategies at
implementation and practices. For instance, our analysis puts the USA in the
market-oriented and self-regulation-promoting approach. As pointed out
before, our analysis might rather show how the USA – and other states –
picture themselves in their national AI strategy, namely as the main proponent
of a market-oriented state, whereas the implementation of AI governance might
look very diﬀerent (see in line with this also Mazzucato, 2011).
Yet, we have still learned something about the self-ascription of governments and the way that they communicate their goals and plans. To
explain why speciﬁc approaches are conducted by diﬀerent countries and
how these approaches play out in practice should be the focus of further
research. Scholars are just at the beginning of systematically exploring the
tools, arrangements, and ecosystems with which governments plan to steer
the future trajectory of AI and other digital technologies that shape our
present and will shape our future.

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

19

Notes
1. Following our previous work (König et al., 2022, p. 11),
we understand AI systems as implementations of digital technology that
are designed to interact with a given environment and to realize predeﬁned goals by processing data in ways which allow the system to
modify its behaviour (Russell & Norvig, 2016). The program that guides
the behaviour of the system is informed by data fed into the system
and patterns derived from this data.
2. Section one in the online supplemental material outlines the case selection strategy. Out of 51 states that belong to the EU, OECD or G20, 13 countries did not
have any oﬃcial AI strategy at the end of 2020. This changed for some of these
countries, such as Great Britain, in the following months; however, data collection
ended at the end of 2020 so that strategies passed after this date were not
included. From the remaining 38 countries, we excluded those which did not
have a standalone AI strategy or had passed only sector-speciﬁc ones. Some
countries have unoﬃcial AI strategies which are not passed by government
bodies and are therefore excluded. We treat the EU as a sovereign entity which
is a member of the OECD and part of the G-20; more importantly, it is a key
actor that shapes the development, deployment, and governance of AI.
3. Some instruments that did not directly show in the data have been left out. One
example are state-owned companies. It is contended that those companies
played a big role in strategy making in Russia (Petrella et al., 2021). The
actors making the strategy are not identical with the instruments in the strategy. The fact that the Russian strategy opted for self-regulation might beneﬁt
the interests of state-owned companies as they have been part of self-regulatory eﬀorts in the past.
4. Our analysis only includes comprehensive national strategies, i.e., a government
strategy which cover the full spectrum and not only focuses on a speciﬁc policy
sector like industry or research and development. For more information which
countries drop from our sample, visit section two in the online supplemental
appendix. Why certain states have not passed such a strategy is beyond the
scope of our analysis. One possible interpretation is that countries doing so
take an intentional decision by following implicitly or explicitly a laissez-faire
state approach of non-intervention. Other explanations could be low state
capacity, a low level of AI development in a country, being a general laggard
concerning the digital transformation, among others. For the interpretation
of national AI strategies including only a few policy instruments, the fallback
option of having no strategy at all should, however, be kept in mind.
5. We focus on key components of the expected instrument mix for each state
type. This does not mean that, for example, a regulatory state might not also
provide ﬁnancial incentives – e.g., via regulated tariﬀs or allowed return to
investment – or that a market-oriented state would not build institutions to
establish or protect speciﬁc market mechanisms. However, we would argue
that a high usage of these instruments is not an essential component of the
respective state type.
6. The same applies to the pair of market-oriented and self-regulation-promoting
states.

20

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the two anonymous reviewers for the time and eﬀorts spend on
commenting previous versions of this manuscript. The ﬁnal paper proﬁted immensely
from their feedback and suggestions. We would also like to extend our thanks to
Jeremy Richardson, Berthold Rittberger and Tim Büthe for their constructive comments and for steering the manuscript through the publication process. Finally, we
gratefully acknowledge the support by Sarah Kluge, Margareta Maier, Bernadette
Spitzer and Lukas Wörlein during the process of data collection.

Notes on contributor
Christian Djeﬀal is Professor for Law, Science and Technology at Technical University of
Munich (Germany). Markus B. Siewert is Senior Lecturer and Managing Director of the
TUM Think Tank at the Munich School of Politics and Public Policy, Technical University of Munich (Germany). Stefan Wurster is Professor for Policy Analysis at the Munich
School of Politics and Public Policy, Technical University of Munich (Germany).

ORCID
Markus B. Siewert
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8710-531X
Stefan Wurster
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2532-0249

References
Bisson, P., Kirkland, R., & Stephenson, E. (2010). The market state. McKinsey & Company.
Borrás, S., & Edler, J. (2020). The roles of the state in the governance of socio-technical
systems’ transformation. Research Policy, 49(5), 103971. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
respol.2020.103971
Braithwaite, J. (2011). The regulatory state? In R. E. Goodin (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook
of political science (pp. 1–23). University Press.
Brooks, H. (1976). II. Technology assessment in retrospect. Newsletter on Science,
Technology & Human Values, 1(4), 17–29. https://doi.org/10.1177/016224397600100403
Broussard, M. (2019). Artiﬁcial unintelligence: How computers misunderstand the world.
MIT Press.
Bughin, J., Hazan, E., Allas, T., Hjartar, K., Manyika, J., Sjatil, P. E., & Shigina, I. (2019). Tech
for good. Smoothing disruption, improving well-being. McKinsey Global Institute.
Casado-Asensio, J., & Steurer, R. (2014). Integrated strategies on sustainable development, climate change mitigation and adaptation in western Europe: communication rather than coordination. Journal of Public Policy, 34(3), 437–473. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0143814X13000287
Chessen, M. (2017). The Madcom future: How artiﬁcial intelligence will enhance computational propaganda, reprogram human culture, and threaten democracy … and
What can be done about it, Atlantic Council.
Crawford, K. (2021). Atlas of AI. Power, politics, and the planetary costs of artiﬁcial intelligence. Yale University Press.
Dauvergne, P. (2021). The globalization of artiﬁcial intelligence: Consequences for the
politics of environmentalism. Globalizations, 18(2), 285–299. https://doi.org/10.
1080/14747731.2020.1785670

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

21

Di Stefano, G., Gambardella, A., & Verona, G. (2012). Technology push and demandpull perspectives in innovation studies: Current ﬁndings and future research directions. Research Policy, 41(8), 1283–1295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.03.
021
Djeﬀal, C. (2019a). AI, democracy, and the law. In A. Sudmann (Ed.), The democratization of artiﬁcial intelligence: Net politics in the era of learning algorithms (pp. 255–
284). transcript Verlag.
Djeﬀal, C. (2019b). Sustainable development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (SAID). Global
Solutions Journal, 4, 186–192.
Djeﬀal, C. (2020). Artiﬁcial intelligence and public governance: Normative guidelines
for artiﬁcial intelligence in government and public administration. In T.
Wischmeyer & T. Rademacher (Eds.), Regulating artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 227–
293). Springer Verlag.
Ely, A., van Zwanenberg, P., & Stirling, A. (2014). Broadening out and opening up technology assessment: Approaches to enhance international development, coordination and democratisation. Research Policy, 43(3), 505–518. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.respol.2013.09.004
Erdelyi, O. J., & Goldsmith, J. (2018). Regulating artiﬁcial intelligence proposal for a
global solution. In J. Furman, G. Marchant, H. Price, & F. Rossi (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (pp. 95–101).
Association for Computing Machinery.
European Commission. (2020a). Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament
and of the Council on a Single Market For Digital Services (Digital Services Act) and
Amending Directive 2000/31/EC (COM(2020) 825 ﬁnal.
European Commission (2020b) Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) 2020. Brussels:
European Commission. https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/digitaleconomy-and-society-index-desi-2020
Fatima, S., Desouza, K. C., & Dawson, G. S. (2020). National strategic artiﬁcial intelligence plans: A multi-dimensional analysis. Economic Analysis and Policy, 67, 178–
194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eap.2020.07.008
Felt, U., & Wynne, B. (2007). Taking European knowledge society seriously: Report of the
expert group on science and governance to the science, economy and society directorate, directorate-general for research, European commission (EUR: Vol. 22700). Oﬃce
for Oﬃcial Publications of the European Communities.
Fisher, E., Mahajan, R. L., & Mitcham, C. (2006). Midstream modulation of technology:
Governance from within. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, 26(6), 485–496.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0270467606295402
Fiss, P. C. (2011). Building better causal theories: A Fuzzy set approach to typologies in
organization research. Academy of Management Journal, 54(2), 393–420. https://doi.
org/10.5465/amj.2011.60263120
Gasser, U., & Almeida, V. A. F. (2017). A layered model for AI governance. IEEE Internet
Computing, 21(6), 58–62. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2017.4180835
Guston, D. H. (2014). Understanding ‘Anticipatory Governance’. Social Studies of
Science, 44(2), 218–242. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312713508669
Guston, D. H., & Sarewitz, D. (2002). Real-time technology assessment. Technology in
Society, 24(1-2), 93–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0160-791X(01)00047-1
Hasselbalch, J. A. (2018). Innovation assessment: governing through periods of disruptive technological change. Journal of European Public Policy, 25(12), 1855–1873.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2017.1363805

22

C. DJEFFAL ET AL.

Hennen, L. (2012). Why do we still need participatory technology assessment?. Poiesis
& Praxis, 9(1-2), 27–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10202-012-0122-5
Hood, C., & Margetts, H. (2007). The tools of government in the digital age. Macmillan.
Howlett, M. (2019). The policy design primer. Routledge.
Khodabandeh, S., Ransbotham, S., Kiron, D., Candelon, F., Chu, M., & LaFountain, B.
(2020). Expanding AI’s impact with organizational learning. MIT Sloan
Management Review and Boston Consulting Group. https://sloanreview.mit.edu/
projects/expanding-ais-impact-with-organizational-learning/.
Kim, Y. T. (2007). The transformation of the East Asian States: From the developmental
state to the market-oriented state. Korean Social Science Journal, 59.2, 31–60.
Knill, C., Schulze, K., & Tosun, J. (2012). Regulatory policy outputs and impacts:
Exploring a complex relationship. Regulation & Governance, 6(4), 427–444. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-5991.2012.01150.x
König, P., Wurster, S., & Siewert, M. B. (2022). Consumers are willing to pay a price for
explainable, but not for green AI. Evidence from a choice-based conjoint analysis.
Big Data & Society, 9(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1177/20539517211069632
Kuhlmann, S., Stegmaier, P., & Konrad, K. (2019). The tentative governance of emerging science and technology: A conceptual introduction. Research Policy, 48(5),
1091–1097. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.01.006
Kvist, J. (2007). Fuzzy set ideal type analysis. Journal of Business Research, 60(5), 474–
481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.01.005
Majone, G. (1997). From the positive to the regulatory state: Causes and consequences
of changes in the mode of governance. Journal of Public Policy, 17(2), 139–167.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0143814X00003524
Mandel, G. N. (2009). Regulating emerging technologies. Law, Innovation and
Technology, 1(1), 75–92. https://doi.org/10.1080/17579961.2009.11428365
Marchant, G., Tournas, L., & Gutierrez, C. I. (2020). Governing emerging technologies
through soft law: Lessons for artiﬁcial intelligence—an introduction. JURIMETRICS,
61.1, 1–18.
Marchant, G. E., & Wallach, W. (2013). Governing the governance of emerging technologies. In G. E. Marchant, K. W. Abbott, & B. Allenby (Eds.), Innovative governance
models for emerging technologies, (pp. 136–152). Edward Elgar Publishing.
Mazzucato, M. (2011). The entrepreneurial state. Demos.
Mittelstadt, B. (2019). Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI. Nature Machine
Intelligence, 1(11), 501–507. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0114-4
Nemitz, P. (2018). Constitutional democracy and technology in the age of artiﬁcial
intelligence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2133), 20180089. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2018.0089
OECD. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence in society. OECD Publishing.
Ornetzeder, M., & Kastenhofer, K. (2012). Old problems, new directions and upcoming
requirements in participatory technology assessment. Poiesis & Praxis, 9(1-2), 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10202-012-0116-3
Petrella, S., Miller, C., & Cooper, B. (2021). Russia’s Artiﬁcial Intelligence strategy: The
role of state-owned ﬁrms. Orbis, 65(1), 75–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orbis.
2020.11.004
Radu, R. (2021). Steering the governance of Artiﬁcial Intelligence: National strategies in
perspective. Policy and Society, 40(2), 178–193. https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.
2021.1929728

JOURNAL OF EUROPEAN PUBLIC POLICY

23

Rayner, J., & Howlett, M. (2009). Introduction: Understanding integrated policy strategies and their evolution. Policy and Society, 28(2), 99–109. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.polsoc.2009.05.001
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2016). Artiﬁcial intelligence: A modern approach (3rd ed).
Pearson.
Sarewitz, D. (2011). Anticipatory governance of emerging technologies. In G. E. Marchant,
B. R. Allenby, & J. R. Herkert (Eds.), The growing gap between emerging technologies and
legal-ethical oversight: The pacing problem (pp. 95–105). Springer Netherlands.
Saurwein, F., Just, N., & Latzer, M. (2015). Governance of algorithms: Options and limitations. info, 17(6), 35–49. https://doi.org/10.1108/info-05-2015-0025
Schaﬀrin, A., Sewerin, S., & Seubert, S. (2015). Toward a comparative measure of
climate policy output. Policy Studies Journal, 43(2), 257–282. https://doi.org/10.
1111/psj.12095
Simonis, G. (2013). Technology governance. In G. Simonis (Ed.), Konzepte und Verfahren
der Technikfolgenabschätzung (pp. 161–186). Springer.
European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation & Stilgoe, J.
(2019). Monitoring the evolution and beneﬁts of responsible Research and
Innovation. Publications Oﬃce. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/285467.
Stilgoe, J., & Guston, D. H. (2017). Responsible research and innovation. In U. Felt, R.
Fouché, C. A. Miller, & L. Smith-Doerr (Eds.), The Handbook of Science and
Technology studies (pp. 853–880). MIT Press.
Taeihagh, A. (2021). Governance of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Policy and Society, 40(2), 137–
157. https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2021.1928377
Taeihagh, A., Ramesh, M., & Howlett, M. (2021). Assessing the regulatory challenges of
emerging disruptive technologies. Regulation & Governance, 15(4), 1009–1019.
https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12392
Thierer, A., Castillo O’Sullivan, A., & Russell, R. (2017). Artiﬁcial intelligence and public
policy. Mercatus Center, George Mason University.
Trajtenberg, M. (2019). Artiﬁcial Intelligence as the next GPT: A political-economy perspective. In A. Agrawal, J. Gans, & A. Goldfarb (Eds.), The Economics of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. An agenda (pp. 175–186). University of Chicago Press.
Ulnicane, I., Knight, W., Leach, T., Stahl, B. C., & Wanjiku, W.-G. (2020). Framing governance for a contested emerging technology: Insights from AI Policy. Policy and
Society, 40.2, 158–177. https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2020.1855800
United Nations General Assembly. (2019). Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. A/74/486.
https://www.undocs.org/A/74/486.
Van Dijck, J. (2013). The culture of connectivity - a critical History of Social media. Oxford
University Press.
Van Zwanenberg, P., Ely, A., & Stirling, A. (2009). Emerging technologies and opportunities for international science and technology foresight STEPS Working Paper 30.
Brighton: STEPS Centre, 4–13.
Wilsdon, J., & Willis, R. (2004). See-through science: Why public engagement needs to
move upstream. Demos.
World Bank. (2021). Harnessing Artiﬁcial Intelligence for development on the post-COVID19 era: A review of national AI strategies and policies. World Bank.
Wynne, B. (1975). The Rhetoric of consensus politics: A critical review of technology
assessment. Research Policy, 4(2), 108–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333
(75)90028-1

