Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 1

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 2

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 3

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 4

UDK 327(474.3)+327(4)
La 801

Editor-in-chief ÞANETA OZOLIÒA
Latvian–English translation KÂRLIS STREIPS
Cover design KRISTÎNE PLÛKSNA

When quoting, a reference to the source is mandatory

© Chancery of the President of Latvia, 2007
© Kârlis Streips,
Latvian–English translation, 2007
© Kristîne Plûksna, cover design, 2007
ISBN 978–9984–808–13–0

© “Zinâtne” Publishers, 2007

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 5

Contents
Introduction

................................................

7

Dr Vaira Vîíe-Freiberga, GOAL Europe – on the 50th Anniversary
President of the Republic of the Treaty of Rome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
of Latvia (1999–2007)

9

Ivars Ijabs

The Dimension of Values in European Integration . . . . . 13

Toms Rostoks

Debates about the Future of the European
Constitutional Treaty During a Period of Reflection . . . 43

Kristîne Krûma

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection:
How Many Hurdles Against the European Dream? . . . . 69

Iveta Reinholde

Multi-Level Governance in the EU:
How Many Floors Will the Building Have? . . . . . . . . . . . 97

Andrejs Jakobsons

The Development of Economic Integration
in Europe: from Coal and Steel to a Single Economic
Area and Toward Challenges of the Future . . . . . . . . . . . 122

Daunis Auers

Friend or Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common
Agricultural Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141

Kristîne Krûma
and Ivars Indâns
Inga Ulnicâne-Ozoliòa

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union . . . 160
The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge
and Innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198

Þaneta Ozoliòa,
The European Union’s Common Foreign
Atis Lejiòð, Gatis Pelnçns, and Security Policy in the Crossfire, though not
Dzintra Bungs
at the Crossroads, of Values and Interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226
Gatis Puriòð

Thoughts about the Future of the EU:
from Market to State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278

The authors

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 6

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 7

Introduction
Latvia’s accession to the European Union occurred at a time when most Member
States felt that European integration had achieved its highest possible level and that
only a bit of effort was still needed to turn dreams about a merged and unified Europe
into reality. Ratification of the European Constitutional Treaty (ECT) was to be a
symbolic conclusion to this historical process, marking the beginning of a new period
in time.
When referenda on the ECT led to its rejection in France and the Netherlands,
however, there was much bemusement among politicians and European citizens about
the further development of the EU. Many European research institutes and centres
began to debate the future of the EU. That is why the International Environment
Research Group of Latvia’s Strategic Analysis Commission decided to focus its attention
on the development of the EU, as well. One of the most important aspects of the
research was the need to define a precise conceptual framework for analysis so as not to
sink into a swamp of policies, facts, events, statements, laws and documents. A review
of achievements and approaches taken by scholars in other countries allowed us to
conclude that there has not been sufficient evaluation of the interaction of values and
interests in terms of how this affects the further development of EU institutions and
policies. While the ECT was being drafted and signed, politicians constantly made
reference to the values which Europeans supposedly all have in common. If one looks
at the positions which Member States take in response to various policies, however,
one clearly sees that interests are on the front burner, while common values are forgotten
altogether. For this reason, the authors of this book have evaluated European values as
such and applied these to manifold EU policies, pointing also to difficulties which
Latvia shall have to take into account in the future.
This is both a timely and a very diverse issue, and that is what encouraged us to
invite different kinds of scholars to take part in our work – economists, philosophers,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 8

8

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA

sociologists, political scientists and jurists. Several discussions among experts were
organised during the development of the project. These were attended by representatives
of the Latvian Foreign Ministry, the Bank of Latvia, the European Commission’s office in
Latvia, the Cabinet of Ministers, various political parties, and the Latvian Confederation
of Employers. Also participating in the analysis of Europe’s future were the former
French ambassador to Latvia, Michael Foucher, as well as Willem Noe from the European
Commission. During the concluding phase of the research, Latvian representatives at
various EU institutions offered their contribution to the discussion. These included
Ingrîda Labucka, Egils Levits, Igors Ludborþs and Inna Ðteinbuka.
2007 will mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome. In reviewing the historical
importance of this treaty, Latvian President Vaira Vîíe-Freiberga, who established the
Strategic Analysis Commission, has offered her views about the most important issues
of the EU. She calls on us to be courageous in naming problems and in offering equally
brave solutions, as opposed to dealing only with that which has been achieved before.
Professor ÞANETA OZOLIÒA
Chairwoman, Strategic Analysis Commission

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 9

DR VAIRA VÎÍE-FREIBERGA,
President of the Republic of Latvia (1999–2007)

GOAL Europe – on the 50th Anniversary
of the Treaty of Rome
Historical anniversaries provide us with the opportunity to evaluate the
influence of past events on our contemporary lives. The fiftieth anniversary of
the signing of the Treaty of Rome should inspire us to contemplate the vision
of those who sought to forge a united Europe in 1957. As the inheritors of the
Europe that these illustrious men and women envisioned, we must consider
how we can further our predecessors’ ideals and generate a fresh vision for
those who will look back upon our efforts fifty years from now.
The drafting of the Treaty of Rome occurred with the devastation of the Second
World War still fresh in the minds of the Treaty’s authors, who formulated the
major principles that form the foundation of the European Union today. Four
basic freedoms – namely the free movement of goods, capital, services and
persons – remain the basis of continued European integration.
No treaty has so effectively served to ensure peace and stability on this
continent for such a lengthy period. The Treaty of Rome helped to promote the
economic growth of the European Community for a full three decades before its
first major revision, the Single European Act, took effect in 1987. Other treaties
have followed since then, at times obscuring our capacity to study the effects
of one before another has superseded it. Now our ability to offer Europeans a
viable vision for the future will require the same type of boldness that was
displayed by the authors of the Treaty of Rome.
To my mind, four fundamental matters must be at the centre of public
debate if we are to clarify our vision of the future and continue to construct a
European Union that is as sound as the edifice bequeathed to us by those who
drafted the Treaty of Rome. We could christen these concepts all together as
the GOAL Programme – governance, openness, accountability and leadership.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 10

10

Dr VAIRA VÎÍE-FREIBERGA

Governance
European integration has been facilitated by a firmly rooted civil society
among the EU Member States and effective institutions of governance. However, the challenges posed by the ongoing expansion of the EU, the continuing
need to improve the quality of life of our inhabitants, and the necessity of
enhancing Europe’s presence on the global stage require a thorough renovation
of the EU mechanisms of governance.
Although the EU has distinctly defined policies on various issues and
considerable financial resources, many people are dissatisfied with what they
perceive as irrational expenditures and with the slow pace of economic growth.
They are concerned about the possible consequences of planned reforms.
Politically, we have agreed that multi-level governance should be implemented,
but we have not yet agreed on how to do so. This is hindering the ability of the
EU Member States to adapt to multi-level governance at the national level.
Nevertheless, it is already possible to identify some common aspects of
multi-level governance that will be critical to our success. Firstly, economic,
social, environmental, regional and other policies that are introduced at different
levels should be implemented with unified goals in mind, taking care not to
constrict one’s view to any one level alone. Secondly, it is vital to maintain
effective co-operation among the institutions of different Member States at each
of these levels.
Thirdly, if multi-level governance is to succeed, then the public, private and
non-governmental sectors must all work in concert. Fourthly, while each
Member State must show initiative and defend its national priorities, we must
always keep the common goals of the Union in mind. Above all, the citizens of
the EU must be involved in policymaking at every step of the process.

Openness
The EU decades-long success has been partially due to its openness. Europeans
need to be open to new approaches to the changing global challenges, as well
as to new potential members of the organisation. Expansion has strengthened
the EU as a whole and has motivated positive transformation not only within
the new Member States, but also among the EU remaining prospective

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 11

GOAL Europe – on the 50th Anniversary of the Treaty of Rome

11

members. Latvia is an excellent example of how setting clear goals and taking
advantage of the opportunities offered by the EU can lead to rapid growth, for
Latvia now has the fastest growing economy in Europe.
Freezing or delaying the EU further expansion is not an acceptable option
for Latvia. I believe that such a loss of openness would result in lost time and
inflict irreparable damage on the democratic reforms that a number of aspirant
countries have undertaken. The Member States that joined the EU in 2004 implemented sweeping and painful reforms with the knowledge that these
would pave the way to full membership in a community of modern, liberal
and democratic states. Knowing that our efforts would be rewarded gave us
the strength to accomplish an exceedingly difficult transition. As one of the most
recent beneficiaries of the EU openness, we are convinced that maintaining
this historically important value is vital to the future of the Union.

Accountability
The rapidity of the European integration process and the need to ensure
that our structures adapt to it has created an unusual situation for Europe’s
democracies. In recent years, the European project seems to have trapped itself
in bureaucratic corridors, its theses and themes created by an elite whose voice
has become increasingly distant from the ears of the public. The two negative
results in referenda on the European Constitution should be read as clear
warning signals.
The reaction to these warnings was no less worrisome. Rather than analysing
what went wrong and subjecting the ‘Eurocracy’ to deserved self-criticism, the
electorate was made a scapegoat and condemned as ill-informed. The communication gap between the EU bureaucracy and the general public is one of
our most serious stumbling blocks. The surge of Euroscepticism in some of the
EU Member States is a clear danger sign. If we are to take these warnings seriously,
then we must convince all Europeans that the European project is truly their
project and not only that of a Brussels elite. But in order for this to happen,
politicians and the bureaucracy must be held accountable for their work. The
inhabitants of the EU need to see a clear and understandable picture of how and
where common resources are being allocated, and what benefits they derive
from common policies and projects.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 12

12

Dr VAIRA VÎÍE-FREIBERGA

Leadership
The European project is not a mere abstraction. It is an actual edifice that
was planned by politicians with high ideals, but with their feet firmly on the
ground. If we are to emerge from our current crisis of self-confidence, we need
leadership of the sort that does not stoop to populism. Unfortunately, it does
happen for some of the Member States’ political leaders to lose their way at
times, focusing on the ephemeral moods of voters rather than inviting their
citizens to a serious debate about a vision for our future. Instead of leading,
there are politicians who pander to shifting political winds by setting up
perceived national interests as incompatible with pan-European interests, thus
imperilling a project that will be our legacy to future generations.
Jean Monet and Robert Schumann, the principal architects of today’s Europe,
dreamt of a new form of international partnership that would prevent war and
bring prosperity to a continent devastated by ever recurring conflicts. Their dream
came true – Europe has maintained a course of peace, stability and prosperity
for over half a century. It is our duty and responsibility to future Europeans to
ensure that the stability, well-being and security which our predecessors
bequeathed to us is maintained and strengthened, as well as being allowed to
extend beyond the borders of the present-day European Union.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 13

IVARS IJABS

The Dimension of Values in European Integration
Each era in time has its own recognised problems. The European Union
was established in a post-war world and at a time when major totalitarian
‘value projects’ had discredited themselves. It is not all that long ago that
masses of individuals were destroyed in the name of ‘preserving European
culture’ or ‘liberating the working classes.’ European civilisation was brought
to the brink of destruction in the name of strictly defined values, along with
attempts to support them in a consistent way. Therefore any mighty political
vision today is, with good reason, suspected of involving too much ideology.
The idea of the European Union, too, was not originally based on any
universal concept of a completely just society or the emancipation of society.
The initial goals appear to have been quite specific from today’s perspective –
peace, security and wealth in Europe. These are very practical ideals, and they
were quite sufficient back then to launch an expansive political project. As Kaube
has pointed out, the Union was established as an ‘entity which is liberated of
ideas or ‘visions’.’1
The post-war world dictated the activities of this unique organisation to a
considerable degree at first. Common values and identities are still not the
main driving force behind the EU – administrative, economic and technological
mechanisms perform that role instead. The average citizen is familiar with the
Union mostly on the basis of taxes, subsidies and directives, not political
manifestations or major ideas which everyone holds in common. It cannot be
denied, however, that over the course of time, the issue of common values has
become more and more important in the EU’s development. Initially, it was
quite an elite project, but today the Union has changed significantly toward
the direction of democratisation, and these processes of democratisation have

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

14

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 14

IVARS IJABS

expanded the dimension of values in EU politics to a very considerable degree. We are persistently asked today to define the foundations for a common
European sense of ‘us’, for a new and common identity.
The subject of values has been topical in recent EU documents. The ‘suspended’
draft of the European Constitutional Treaty, as well as a document from the
European Commission which is called ‘The Future of Europe in a Globalised
World’ are just a few examples. The values which are declared in official documents,
however, are seldom exhaustive. The problem with politically declared values
is that the authors of such documents are politicians who do not want to paint
themselves into any colour. For that reason, they define values in a very broad
and abstract way. This allows for various interpretations in the future, but it
does not make it possible to evaluate policies on the basis of their correspondence
to the declared values. A good example is the concept of ‘respect for human
dignity’, as defined in the draft Constitutional Treaty.2 It is clear that Auschwitz
and the Gulag held no respect for human dignity, but were anyone to ask
whether human dignity is best served by agricultural subsidies or investments
in science, that person would hear many different answers. Clearly, a more
specific explanation of the value orientations that are typical of Europe must
therefore be sought outside of the EU’s official documents.
The European Union has undergone rapid and dynamic development over
the last 15 years. In the late 1990s, Latvia had little hope of joining the EU in
2004. Similarly, the pace of EU integration has sometimes moved ahead of
even the most courageous predictions. This rapid development has often created
the impression that European integration processes are best understood in the
context of future projects and developments. The name of the EU ‘constitutional
assembly’ – the ‘Convention on the Future of Europe’ – makes this clear. The
fact is that the future of Europe has become both less clear and less tempting.
Recent failures such as disagreements among Member States on the issue of the
war in Iraq, the failure to ratify the Constitutional Treaty, and the fundamental
helplessness of the ambitious Lisbon Strategy – all of this means a pause in the
rapid development that has been experienced. There is a new level of confusion
about the identity, desires and capabilities of a unified Europe. Increasingly,
Europe as a community of values is questioned, and this indicates that there is
a need to balance projects of the future with an understanding of the experiences of the past, with the value orientations that have been inherited from the
past and that still have very much to do with European life.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 15

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

15

Any attempt to evaluate Europe’s future from the perspective of values
inevitably comes up against several objections. First of all, it is sometimes argued
that political life is dictated by interests, not values. Both in Member States and
at the EU level, successful development is more likely to be guaranteed by
situational cleverness and the ability of politicians to determine the most
advantageous solutions in any given situation than by any attempt to present
values as an end in themselves. Of course, specific interests can be well served
by a mention of values – can anyone object to the idea that we should all enjoy
peace, justice and respect for human dignity? Any opposition to such ideas is
unwise and also dangerous. After all, if we hold on to values, we can easily be
injured vis-à-vis the interests of others. As Puriòð has pointed out elsewhere in this
book, ‘other actors do not perform on the basis of rules proposed by idealists’ in
the global and international system.3 It has to be said, however, that this ‘realistic’
view is based on a fundamental misunderstanding. Values and interests are
defined separately as guidelines for human behaviour. Here we might point to
the ideas of the Canadian philosopher Charles Taylor – values are values because
they are not arbitrarily created and cannot be chosen.4 The horizon of values
exists already, and it is assumed to be objective. We cannot choose to value
something from now on. On the other hand, values in a modern society obtain
their specific content only through the intermediation of independently defined
interests and individual decisions. Values which do not resonate with interests
and individual decisions are perceived by people as dogmatic and empty. That
is why the declaration of general values in political documents sometimes
creates the impression of excessive verbosity. The conflict between values and
interests, in other words, is usually a conflict between those values which correspond to interests in the specific situation and those which do not.
Second, one might argue that even if values perform a specific role in political
life, they are nonetheless too abstract and open to interpretation to help in any
analysis of political processes. For instance, the European Union has always
praised concepts such as security, individual rights and economic welfare, but
that says nothing about how exactly these values are to be pursued. Values, in
other words, are too general to be of use in any attempt to comprehend the
conflicting and dynamic processes of Europe in the present day. Problems
with the EU’s Common Security Policy, for example, emerge not from any lack
of unanimity about the value of security, but rather from diversity of understanding as to what that concept really means.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

16

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 16

IVARS IJABS

This objection, however, does not reject the importance of the perspective
of values; instead, it demands diversity and ceaseless updating of that perspective. It leads us to avoid the false assumption that European values create
a harmonised and complete system in which all components are mutually
agreed and arranged in a hierarchical structure. This is simply not true. The
value orientations which have traditionally been decisive in Europe are contradictory – an orientation toward political pluralism conflicts with excessive
nationalism, and the demand for social solidarity has come up against the value
of individual freedom and accomplishment. Indeed, the world view which is
typical of Europe is based specifically on this lack of agreement about value
orientations and on the conflicts and compromises which are the result of the
diversity of opinion.
Conflicts among value orientations have been particularly common during
the last 15 years, when the EU has undergone rapid development. Individual
aspects of this are reviewed elsewhere in this book, with each author focusing
on a different aspect of the EU’s future. Of particular importance here is the
future of the Constitutional Treaty, which is still unclear. There are postulates
in the treaty which are important expressions and continuations of European
political tradition – the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the definition of EU
citizenship, and new rules regarding the relationship among various institutions.
On the other hand, the fact that many citizens rejected the very idea of the
Constitutional Treaty – as manifested most clearly in the ‘no’ vote in France and
the Netherlands in the spring of 2005 – represents a very specific expression of
value orientations and concepts, particularly in terms of the role of the state in
ensuring social solidarity and immigration controls. These are concepts which
can hinder EU integration, but it is absolutely unacceptable to reject them out of
hand as somehow being ‘un-European’. As consideration of the Constitutional
Treaty continues, it is of key importance to think about labour markets and
migration. Protection of labour markets is becoming an increasingly severe
problem in the EU, given that there is an expanding need for the economic
dynamism and competitiveness which have long been of importance in the
world view of Europeans. A similar ‘competition’ among value orientations
has also been seen in the context of the Lisbon Strategy. The political idea of the
strategy focuses on innovation and competitiveness, but it has come up against
a conservative response among political elites in the various nation states, to
say nothing of limited support in the public at large.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 17

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

17

The issues of immigration and labour market liberalisation have also brought
up the matter of the uniqueness of national cultural spaces and preservation
thereof. This is a seminal issue in terms of the self-understanding of Europe
itself. Yes, there has been much movement in the EU toward economic and
political unification, but the preservation of the individual competences of EU
Member States is by no means an unimportant issue when we think about the
Union’s future. Preservation of political and cultural pluralism is still a key
component in the European identity, it exists right alongside such concepts as
solidarity and common values. Of particular importance in this context is the
debate about multi-level governance, because this focuses not only on the relationship between the EU and its Member States, but also on the role of regional
and local governments. Here the issue of European values is very closely linked
to politics in the nation states, to their understanding of what good governance
and democratic participation really mean.
The dimension of values is also important because of the EU Common
Foreign and Security Policy. The former US defence secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, may have been the one who offered the polemical split between ‘old’ and
‘new’ Europe, but it was Europeans themselves who often interpreted this
division as meaning that there is a need to separate ‘true’ Europeans from
others once and for all. Thanks to the conflict over the war in Iraq, Europe has
created an ‘honourable opponent’ against which Europeans often define their
own identity – that opponent is the United States of America. To be sure, antiAmericanism has been around in European Union since the days of Charles de
Gaulle, but the war in Iraq has meant that anti-Americanism is no longer a
privilege of the elite in Europe. The concept has gained considerable support at
all levels of European society.5 In recent times there has been increasing insistence
upon those values which, at least seemingly, separate Europe from the USA. It
is sometimes argued that the USA is a place where politics are not kept separate
from religion, where economic neo-liberalism is the rule, where there are hegemonic ambitions, a denial of the state, mass culture and the death penalty. Any
attempt to define European values as contrary to the United States, however, is
destined to fail. The reasons for such an attempt cannot be based on a unilateral
concept about political and cultural life in America. This point has been addressed by Susan Sontag, who has argued that the USA is not anti-European, it
is rather a ‘neo-European’ culture.6 Many parts of American politics are based
on typically European ideals, they are still closely linked to those ideals. This

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

18

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 18

IVARS IJABS

means that the search for fundamental European values must be based on
more than just politically inspired opposition to a culture which maintains its
fundamental links to the Continent.
Issues related to the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy are particularly important in the context of values, and that goes beyond the issue of
‘damaged’ Transatlantic relations. One problematic issue is the ongoing expansion of the European Union, particularly in terms of the controversial matter
of Turkey’s possible accession. For Latvia, the political future of the EU in
Eastern Europe is particularly important, and this is something which must be
assessed on the basis not only of interests, but also of long term value orientations.
It appears that Europe has recently been coming around to the understanding
that in relations with Russia, the focus must be not only on immediate benefits
from co-operation in the area of energy supplies, but also on the future of
democratisation in Russia. It is also true that there are still uncertainties about
the EU Neighbourhood Policy and the development of co-operation with other
countries. Latvia, as an EU Member State, offers solidarity with other former
Soviet republics such as Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine. This is closely linked
to another important value orientation, one which requires durable belief in
the reliance of leaders in those post-Soviet countries upon the ideals of modern
democracies. Involvement in the development of the Common Foreign and
Security Policy requires an understanding not only of immediate challenges
and interests, but also of the more long term perspective. The debate should
therefore include the different views of various countries and regions in the
EU although the process must not lose sight of the guideposts which all of the
EU has in common – trust in human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
In this context, interesting polemics are offered by the aforementioned
Puriòð, who is sceptical about the EU as a defender of ‘universal values’ and
overall ‘harmony of interests.’ Puriòð represents the school of realism in saying
that ‘[..] those who do not experience a similar improvement in welfare think
that the concept of harmonised interests is hypocritical.’7 Such idealism, therefore, probably will not have much of a future in the EU – according to Puriòð,
the Union should instead focus on an inevitable conflict with the impoverished
world which lies outside the ‘West.’ Particularly in Latvia, however, we must
not forget that the rapid integration of our country into the EU would most
probably not have been possible without a certain amount of ‘universalism’
and ‘idealism’ on the part of ‘old’ Europe. Without it there would have been

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 19

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

19

no major support for the development of democracy and the rule of law in our
country. Any attempt to reduce these processes to the national interests of
individual Member States may be interesting from the perspective of analysis,
but it also narrows our understanding of the present and future of Europe in
an excessively hasty way.
The review of values which I propose here is not all-encompassing. My aim is
to offer a brief look at the debates which have occurred in response to questions
about European identity and the values which shape that identity. There are
several considerations which are at play here:
■ The listed values are by no means the exclusive provenance of Europe.
Political pluralism, for instance, is an inviolable component of many
nations which are not in Europe. The same is true of such ideas as the rule
of law and tolerance. Still, the way in which the world understands these
values is unquestionably European in origin – our understanding of
rights comes from Rome, and our understanding of tolerance comes from
17th-century England. Here I list those values which are of decisive importance in European politics and culture, those which are still discussed
when people debate the Continent’s future.
■ The separation of European values into the political, social and cultural
category is conditional. The issue of social solidarity, for instance, inevitably involves political mechanisms which ensure that solidarity. Still, this
separation allows us to classify values on the basis of whether they are in
line with (1) ideas about good political decisions, (2) ideas about the
‘good life’ in society and harmonised relationships among people, and (3)
all-encompassing cultural models of the world view which are typical of
European thinking as a whole.
1. Political values
■

■

■

■

■

■

Citizenship
Rule of law
Political pluralism
Representation, parliamentarianism, transparency
Nationalism and scepticism about it
Separation of church and state.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 20

20

IVARS IJABS

2. Social values
■

■

■

■

■

Welfare
Tolerance
Individualism
Competition
Free time

3. Cultural values
■

■

■

■

■

Christianity
Enlightenment
Inner life
Irony
Historicity

1. Political values
Citizenship
Any political power structure has its subjects, but only in Europe was this
relationship first defined by the special and individual status of citizenship.
The word ‘citizen’ has quite seldom been strictly defined in the history of the
world. A citizen submits to the power structure, but is also a participant in
shaping that structure. Ancient Greece was the place where relationships that
would later be of importance in Western politics were established – political
authority is based on the will of the community of citizens. Citizens are free
and equal, and one’s political relations as a citizen are kept clearly apart
from other links of dependency, whether economic, familial or other. Citizens
can take equal part in decision making when it comes to issues which affect
everyone.
Of course, citizenship also involves responsibility. Civic relations between
the state and the individual do not allow blame for public problems to be
assigned to a despotic ruler. Citizens are free to take their own decisions, but
they must then take responsibility for that which has been decided. A wellstructured and free country provides for a community of competent citizens

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 21

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

21

who are interested in the future of their community and can undertake responsibility for it.
Values which are important today are based on this ancient ideal of citizenship in Europe – democracy, individual rights and constitutionalism. True
modern democracy, of course, first developed in the United States, so it cannot
really be termed a European value, but it is European as long as modern democracy is based on the idea of the individual’s political status – citizenship.
The typically European ideal of the citizen, of course, is problematic today.
Citizenship is usually seen as nothing more than a formality, as a passport in
one’s pocket. The individual is often linked to his or her community by nothing
more than instrumental consideration – what private benefits come along with
citizenship in that or another country? Since the Cold War in particular, however, the issue of citizenship has once again become important. Societies in
Europe have become individualised and politically inert. Democracies which
are dominated by elitist and professional politicians cannot integrate public
needs and become alienated from those needs. That is why we often hear demands for a new and more content-based citizenship, one which would ensure
the individual’s autonomy whilst simultaneously renewing the individual’s
active link to the political community in which he or she lives.8
Rule of law
An inviolable component of European political identity is the law as a
systematic collection of norms which, via interpretation, are applied to various
situations. The emphasis on the legal regulation of political power has been of
considerable importance in the European understanding of politics. For the
first time in human history, there is a demand for clear and universally known
boundaries which those who hold political power may not cross. The rule of
law has proven to be of vast importance in the modernisation of Europe. The
development of economics, communications and culture has demanded that
political power be predictable. That is why liberal culture in Europe has
supported freedom – not just freedom to take part in governance but, first and
foremost, freedom from arbitrary and unpredictable interference of political
power structures in human lives. The law creates trust and predictability,
the law is that which creates a socially legitimate status for things which
people do.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

22

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 22

IVARS IJABS

The rule of law, as a typical European political value, is closely linked to
ideas about human autonomy – the ability of humans to decide on their own
activities and to take responsibility for same. The role of the law (as defined,
for instance, by Immanuel Kant)9 is not so much to regulate the behaviour of
each individual as, on the contrary, to provide each individual with a social
arena in which he or she may take free and responsible decisions. The aim of
the law is not to serve as a schoolmarm, it is to allow each individual to take
responsibility for his or her own actions. This is a tradition which leads to the
insistence of Europeans upon the rule of law in international relations, too.
Legally regulated relations among sovereign and equal countries – that is an
idea which comes from the Europe of the modern age, and it is a concept which
continues to dominate in European political thought.
Kant’s vision of a free and equal federation of states, one in which the rule of
law prevails, is one of the guidelines for Europe in this regard. Such a federation
is seen as a guarantee of international security – without rule of law, the world
would return to an order where only the strong prevail in accordance with the
natural order.10 Any other structure of international relations contains the
potential for war. This typically European vision has been particularly debated
in recent times in the context of the war in Iraq and of Europe’s split in response
to that conflict. It is well known that many European politicians insisted on the
rule of law in terms of a United Nations mandate for the war. Not all arguments,
however, are on the side of the Europeans when it comes to this particular
matter. Neo-conservative authors in America such as Kagan have argued that
this ideal has often kept Europe, unlike the United States, from being active in
the international arena. The desire to establish relations among countries
which are based on the rule of law at any cost does not allow Europeans to
defend ideals such as human rights, democracy and freedom to any great effect.
Europeans, according to these authors, behave as though such a legal federation
were already in place, and so they risk finding themselves in ‘perpetual peace’
in the most pitiful sense of that concept. Still, one doubts whether the failures
of Europe’s Common Foreign Policy can really be attributed to the insistence
upon the idea of the rule of law. No, the problem is probably a lack of political
unanimity behind the smokescreen of legal procedures and norms.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 23

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

23

Political pluralism
It is true that two of the most powerful totalitarian regimes in the world
appeared specifically in Europe during the previous century, but from the
broader perspective, it can be said that total concentration of power is not typical
in European political culture. In comparison to other regions in the world,
Europe has almost always held political pluralism to be very important. Here
we are discussing the idea that political power must not be concentrated in
any single location or any single pair of hands. Unlike despotic dictatorships
in the East, Europe has never considered absolute concentration of political
power to be a value, and this is a tradition with very deep roots. Some authors
see the origins of the principle in the ‘arranged diversity’ of ancient Greece.11
Others plump for the duality of secular and spiritual power in Western Europe
during the Middle Ages.12 In the modern age, this approach is manifested in
concepts about the separation of power. These ideas emerged in Europe and
would later become a cornerstone for modern democracies. The concentration
of power in the apparatus of the state is also seen as something that is undesirable. Charles Louis de Montesquieu, while still a supporter of the monarchy,
wrote of the corps intermediaries – the necessary ‘intermediate corporations’ between state and citizen which serve to mitigate and to control political power. This
is an element which is of significant importance in the theoretical European
tradition of the ‘civil society’ – a system in which the capacity for civic selforganisation is seen as a counterweight to the administrative power of the state.
In this context, some authors point to the fact that in European political life,
there is usually maintenance of a long-lasting balance among various contradictory interests without allowing them to develop into an open conflict.13 This
perspective helps to explain the period of the Cold War in Europe. Despite
ideological confrontations and military tensions, it never did turn into a ‘hot’
war. Authors often point out that European states have extensive experience
with wars amongst themselves, and in this they differ from the United States,
which has not seen war on its territory for a very long time. This is experience
which has affected European mentality – Europeans have lost faith in aggressive and voluntary solutions to political problems. Umberto Eco has polemically claimed that if the terrorists of September 11 had blown up not the World
Trade Centre in New York, but Notre Dame in Paris and Big Ben in London,
Europeans, unlike the Americans, would have reacted with ‘[..] horror, pain

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 24

24

IVARS IJABS

and disgust, not a shattered tone and syndrome of depression which are compensated with the instinctive desire to take immediate and inevitable revenge.’14
One can dispute this idea, of course, but there is no doubt that Europe’s longlasting experience with pluralism, conflict, compromise and fragile balance is
both unique and sustainable. This experience probably should not be subjected
to the strict federalisation of the United States, as Puriòð suggests in his paper.
The European Union’s slogan is ‘United in Diversity’, and this is more than just
an ideological slogan. Diversity really is a distinct European value. Problems
in contemporary Europe, it appears, are more caused by the first part of the
slogan – ‘united’.
Representation, parliamentarianism and transparency
Another specific element in European politics is the concept of representation.
This is a basic component of a democratic regime, one which seems self-evident
today. Citizens can nominate their own representatives in support of their own
interests, and that is neither natural nor trivial. This is a specifically European
form of political power. Until recently, it did not exist anywhere outside the
‘old world’. Representation creates a special link among those who are involved
in it – those who are delegated to represent others receive trust, and their activities depend on that trust. European representation speaks to bilateral links
between the representative and those who have chosen the representative. It is
a contract of sorts, and both sides are, at least formally, equal within it. This
structure of political life has not been found outside of Europe – everywhere
else, people have either pursued their interests in politics directly, or they have
not pursued those interests at all.
The concept of representation dates back to the 17th century, and it was by
no means democratic at that time, at least not in the modern sense of the word.
Initially, aristocrats were the only ones to nominate representatives, and later,
in England, an oligarchy did the same. It was in the UK, however, where the
tradition of parliamentarianism first emerged, and it has become enormously
important in European politics. A parliament is more than just a gathering of
representatives, it speaks to a specific way in which those representatives act.
A parliament is a ‘talking shop’, and decisions are based not on influence or
wealth, but on the best and most convincing arguments. Parliamentarianism
in Europe is based on the idea that governance is founded on debate. That is a

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 25

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

25

classical ideal which in some senses is not in line with reality today, but serves
as a regulative idea, which is still of major importance. It is no accident that
European countries typically have parliamentary or semi-presidential regimes,
as opposed to purely presidential ones.
The idea of parliamentarianism also involves the assumption that political
decisions are taken in an open and transparent way. Parliamentary debates offer
a concentrated ‘representation’ of the debates which are taking place among
the public at large. Those who take political decisions, therefore, must be able
to explain to people why they took exactly this, and not another decision. This
is a process which defines the European democratic tradition – one which, it
seems, is not yet fully in place in Latvia. According to this tradition, members
of the public must consistently attack any decision that is accepted in a closed
or secretive way, without any open debate at all
Nationalism and scepticism about it
Nationalism and the associated assumption that political power is rooted
in the will of a sovereign nation are often linked to the Judeo-Christian tradition
in European culture. Ideas about the nation as a special community of solidarity
are typical in nationalism, and they have emerged specifically from this tradition.
These ideas are based on the community’s special and ‘chosen’ mission in the
world, on the territory which it unquestionably deserves (the ‘promised land’,
for instance), etc. In this sense, the origins of European nationalism are deeply
rooted in history, but generally speaking, nationalism is a phenomenon of the
modern world, one that is linked to the modern and sovereign state, the development of democracy, and the problems of democracy, too.
If we review the literature which has been published in Latvia on the topic
of political issues since the restoration of the country’s independence from a
purely quantitative perspective, we see that the national dimension is still the
determinant issue in Latvia. Democracy, human rights, Europe and social issues
are comparatively less important in terms of the quantity of literature about
them. This is understandable to a certain extent, given the specific history of
the Republic of Latvia. On the other hand, nationalism today is usually reviewed
on the basis of considerably greater nuance and equivocation. The role of
nationalism is not denied in the present-day world, but it has long since not
been seen as an unequivocal value in Europe.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

26

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 26

IVARS IJABS

In order to gain a better understanding of nationalism, we must separate out
two fundamental dimensions within it. On the one hand, nationalism is democratic and aimed at public integration. An emphasis on nationality establishes
democratic equality among people, ensuring that politics are independent of
inherited, economic or cultural privileges. In this sense, nationalism allows
people to feel a sense of belonging to a specific community and to accept certain
rights and obligations. On the other hand, nationalism has often proven to be
divisive. National identity is often shaped specifically so as to keep apart from
another nationality or to distinguish oneself in comparison to it. The other
nationality is usually viewed in negative terms. In this sense, nationalism is no
longer integrative. The aim is, instead, to seek the image of an enemy and then
to combat the enemy with undemocratic weapons in hand.
It is specifically because of this latter fact that Europeans treat the idea of
nationalism with considerable caution. Particularly in leftist politics, nationalism
is often suspected of being less than democratic. Since the very beginning, the
EU has seriously opposed the threat of antagonistic nationalism. One of the
founding fathers of the EU, Robert Schuman, said in 1950 that one of the basic
motivations for establishing the European Communities was to overcome
nationalism in favour of that which is supranational.15 This belief is still very
much on the table – national emotions, pride and patriotism do not have to be
prevented,16 but they must be channelled into a new sense of the supranational
community. This can create new identities, loyalties and political participation.
Sometimes this view is defended on the basis of the claim that the identity of
European nations is itself based on artificial constructs which were ‘conjured up’
in the 18th and 19th centuries. This permits for the creation for higher identities –
a European Union, a Baltic Sea region or other identity. Europeans have experience with this kind of thing, and it should be put to use on a critical and
productive basis.
One must respect the problem which Puriòð has indicated – an open and
multicultural identity is less capable than an exclusive identity to promote
‘consolidation of large groups’ and the emergence of a unified and self-confident ‘European nation.’17 We must not forget, however, that from the very
beginning the EU project has been aimed against this negatively formulated
identity (Europeans versus Americans, Russians, Arabs or others). Instead, the
EU has tried to implement a ‘thin’ sense of community which is based on
democracy and human rights.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 27

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

27

Separation of church and state
Europe has traditionally ensured fairly strict separation between secular
and spiritual power, between politics and religion. Politics, in the European
view, are a completely secular process, one that is not expected to achieve
supernatural goals. Political power structures do not have to care for the souls
of citizens, they deal only with the external manifestations of their lives. If a
state thinks about the conscience of its citizens, then it inevitably limits the
freedom of those citizens. This is a fairly definitive belief in modern Europe –
the Continent is radically opposed to any manifestation of a theocracy.
We must note here that this postulate affects not just religion in the traditional
sense of the word, but also various political lessons which, like religion, seek
to create a monopolistic and unique explanation of the events of the world. We
can certainly consider Marxism, which, as numerous researchers have noted,
is quasi-religious in content. Modern Europeans sometimes stress the doctrine
of separation of church and state in contrast to the seeming ‘fundamentalism’
of the Americans. True, this is a norm which is observed quite selectively in
Europe. Religious lessons are mandatory in many European schools, and many
countries have their official state churches. ‘Old’ Europe, however, generally
tends to reject the manifestation of religiosity in the public arena. That does
not mean any rejection of religious belief, but that is a belief which is left up to
the individual and his or her conscience.

2. Social values
Welfare
High appreciation of material benefits is probably not a specifically European
thing. Wealth is much appreciated in all civilisations. Europeans, however,
have a special idea about the forms, manifestations and meaning of welfare in
human lives. First of all, Europe generally has a positive attitude toward the
ordinary and ‘earthly’ life. To be sure, cults of asceticism and poverty have not
been unknown in Europe, but they have never had a dominant influence, as,
for instance, has been the case in Indian culture. Welfare has always been recognised as a positive value, one which creates a foundation for a proper life
among individuals.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

28

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 28

IVARS IJABS

Second, Europe has always been dominated by the view that very unevenly
distributed welfare is not proper welfare. This assumption has often been far
from reality, of course, but the ‘ideal’ European will never feel happy if he has
private wealth but is surrounded by terrible poverty. ‘Social solidarity’, as
defined by modern Socialism, is certainly a fairly recent invention, but the
foundation for such ideas about the social nature of welfare in Europe was
created long before that. For instance, we are accustomed to thinking about
feudal relationships during the Middle Ages in negative terms – we believe
that to have been a terribly undemocratic and irrational system. One of the true
obligations of the feudal aristocracy, however, was to take care of people in the
lower classes, to defend them and to allow them to use resources for free. This
was true specifically because of the aristocratic status of those individuals. In
other words, ‘social solidarity’ and ‘social responsibility’ are not really anything
new. Socialists in the 19th century simply organised an exaggerated and new
type of reaction to the polarisation of welfare which was created by the collapse
of feudal relationships in the wake of the expansion of capitalism.18
For this reason, it is difficult to agree with Puriòð when he argues that the
meaning of ethical considerations and the subject of social justice in the global
economy are ‘an illusion created by post-war welfare’ – something which
Europe should eliminate as soon as possible.19 In essence this is fundamental
social intuition, and its roots are found not in abstract altruism, but in the
understanding that terrible poverty is of a dehumanising nature. Interestingly,
ideas about the meaning of overall social welfare in the lives of individuals
have been rooted in European consciousness far more deeply than one might
expect. Even neo-liberal ‘market theologians’ such as von Hayek and Friedman
do not really object to the spread of public welfare – even for them, this is an
unequivocal value. These authors do, however, try to suggest that this goal will
be achieved more quickly if unlimited free market forces are unleashed.
There are also other aspects to European ideas about welfare. Western
culture is often accused of being ‘materialistic’. True, Europeans like to accuse
Americans of this particular ‘sin’. Sustained stereotypes say that Americans
can no longer be rescued from consumerism. This is an incomplete idea even if
we ignore real differences in the European and the American understanding of
welfare in such areas as environmental concerns. A special attitude toward
material benefits is rooted in European culture and experience, while in
America, this attitude is only expressed, albeit in a fairly vivid way.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 29

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

29

One element is an orientation toward rational accumulation and expansion
of property, roots for which Max Weber sees in Protestant religiosity.20 Fundamental changes in the European economic mentality are the foundation for
this thinking. Work appeared in Northern Europe as a new and determinant
value in the modern age. Of course, people have always worked and managed
things, but physical work for self-sustenance in the antique world and during
the Middle Ages is often seen as something which resembles slavery. In the
modern age, Europeans have come up with the idea that work and enhanced
welfare are key in a good life – things which prove that the individual is living
in accordance with the structure of the world. Hard and skilful work and
economic success are granted the status of moral accomplishments, they prove
that the individual is ‘chosen’. At the same time, however, many authors have
pointed out that the religious and moral justification for economic life has
disappeared in present-day Europe. The property which is owned by an individual has itself become the highest value, it no longer reflects moral achievements. Property is what mostly determines the social existence or non-existence
of the individual. Talk of ‘European materialism’, in other words, is not entirely
unjustified.
Tolerance
Tolerance is a value which is emphasised in the European Union’s normative documents, and it is of key importance in European identity. This is a
specifically European element of mentality, one which encourages people to
distance themselves from all objective differences related to religion, race,
culture, world view, class, etc. The European is asked to see others as nothing
more than people who are similar to the European himself or herself.
There are extensive debates in our time about how we should interpret this
concept of tolerance. Its old meaning – nothing more than indulgence toward
that which is different – is no longer really valid. Many of us may dislike black
people, homosexuals or Muslims, but we tolerate them because of our charity,
love of humanity or ‘European nature’. This classical understanding of tolerance
is clearly insufficient today. Tolerance today demands not just getting along
with those who are different, but also accepting their difference. This is not the
tolerance of a humanitarian majority, it refers to the need to allow others to
define their own identity without insisting on some aspect of ‘normalcy’. In

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 30

30

IVARS IJABS

this sense, tolerance demands not only an equal attitude toward everyone, but
also an elimination of hidden inequality and discrimination, which has been
so common in European society until now. There have been patriarchal ideas
about gender relations, discrimination against representatives of other religions
and races, homophobia, anti-Semitism and the like.
The idea of tolerance today has found its most thorough manifestation in
the concept of so-called political correctness, although this has been expanded
most thoroughly in the United States. Minority groups in Western society which
are different in terms of gender, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, physical or
mental disability, etc., are stylised as victims of cultural oppression. Being different is seen as a self-sufficient value. Existing cultural traditions are reassessed, because traditional culture, it goes without saying, has always been
dominated by ‘dead white males’, from Plato to Freud. All of this means that
the understanding of culture must be expanded to include the values of
African, Asian and other non-Western cultures.
It is significant that the spread of political correctness is not always viewed
positively in Europe. Despite the fact that the ideas of tolerance are fundamentally important, the transformation of those ideas into a militant ideology is
dangerous for several reasons. First of all, the increasing demands of political
correctness have the potential of limiting freedom of speech, and in this case
they are in violation of some of the basic assumptions of democracy. Some
European philosophers such as Þiþek have claimed, and not without reason,
that ever-present political correctness represents a particular ban against thought
(‘Denkverbot’).21 This ban is aimed against valid attempts to improve society. It
appears that Puriòð criticises political correctness from this perspective, seeing
it as an obstacle against the consolidation of the community of EU citizens.22 It
is also true that political correctness quite often achieves the unintended effect.
This applies to so-called positive discrimination and, in some cases, even greater
segregation. People who proclaim themselves to be victims are increasingly
seeking priorities in the redistribution of resources in welfare states.
Individualism
Individualism is also often cited as one of the fundamental values of modern
Europe. When asked to explain the meaning of the term, however, people offer
a wide range of opinions. Here we must look not at theoretical constructs, but

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 31

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

31

rather at the manifestation of the value of individualism in specific societies.
Individualism is an issue of culturally conditioned mentality. In modern Europe,
people see themselves as the authors of their own biographies. What is more,
the biographies often have to be rewritten several times during the lives of
their authors. Individualism today, however, is more than just mentality. It is
deeply rooted in public institutions, beginning with seemingly universal
human rights, which are construed as the rights of the individual, and ending
with social policy which has, to a large extent, been applied to the individual,
not to the family or a local community.
Individualism is not egotism, it does not refer to selfish cynicism or apathy
toward moral considerations. On the contrary, it means that all moral decisions
can be fully justified in the individual’s own judgments and in the individual’s
autonomy, which is seen as unique. The value of individualism is rooted in the
belief that the individual (and not the family, class or anything else) is the basic
building block of society. Moreover, this individual, under normal circumstances,
is able to take independent decisions on what would be best for him or her.
Individuals do not need the protection of society in living a life of full value.
At the same time, individualism also means that people do not have to interfere into the business of others without any particular need. Individualism
speaks to respect toward the private lives of other people, toward the beliefs
and ideas of a good life which others hold. In this sense, individualism also
involves a critical attitude vis-à-vis oneself, one’s judgments and beliefs. I can
be mistaken in my judgments about other individuals. I must not insist on the
absolute truth of my views even if the majority is on my side. This belief is the
foundation for the specifically European denial of capital punishment.
Individualism, however, also has another side. Alexis de Tocqueville was
the first social scientist, who viewed individualism as the fundamental problem
of modern society, arguing that individualism leads people to lose interest in
public life, to lose links with their fellow individuals, and to become locked up
in the sphere of private consumption.23 This idea reappeared in the late 20th
century, when traditional forms of community – the traditional family, the church
and the nation – were undergoing a serious crisis. Individualism was given a
distinctly egotistical tinge. People have become so individualised that moral,
ecological and social issues have lost all meaning in their eyes. In line with de
Tocqueville, authors often point to the danger that this extreme individualism
can open the door to despotism. If all people think only about themselves and

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 32

32

IVARS IJABS

their comfort, no one will stand for democratic values – after all, those values
do not serve any specific individual. This thought was developed in the 1960s by
MacPherson, who described the so-called possessive individualism in European
political theory.24 According to MacPherson, the European individual in the
modern age is constructed first and foremost as a capitalist private owner –
not only with respect to things and resources, but also in relation to his or her
own body and abilities. Modern individuals are their own capitalists and their
own exploiters. The good life is one in which the individual is as successful as
possible in exploiting himself or herself in pursuit of profits.
This, of course, is a leftist criticism of individualism, and it is not completely
acceptable. This is just a polemic emphasis on the materialistic orientation of
European understanding. There are more nuanced discussions of individualism
today. Until the 1980s, individualism of an ideological and conservative nature
was one of the slogans of so-called neo-liberals. Illustrative of this concept is
something which Margaret Thatcher famously said: ‘There is no such thing as
society, there are only individuals.’ Individualism in the Europe of today, however, does not only mean calculating market egotism. Giddens, for instance,
has written about new forms of solidarity and participation.25 These are seen
in new social movements focused on various issues (feminism, human rights,
peace, ecology, gay rights, anti-globalism, etc.) which are quite popular in developed Western countries, and they do not deny the individual autonomy and
independence of the individual. On the contrary, the movements emphasise
such individualism and take nourishment from it. The decisive thing is the
self-realisation of the individual – something which increasingly requires these
manifestations of public participation and solidarity.
Competition and the market
Another value closely linked to individualism is the productive role of
competition. Among other cultures, Europe is distinguished by the belief that
competition among individuals can serve the public interest if it is honest and
sensibly regulated. To be sure, individuals sometimes compete among themselves on the basis of their own interests and nothing else. Other members of
society, however, gain from such selfish competition when it occurs in such
fields as the economy, the arts, science, or politics. This diversity in interests,
therefore must not be prevented, it must be made constructive. Huizinga, in

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 33

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

33

‘Homo Ludens’, has stressed the role of games and creative competition in
European culture. Regulated competition is presented as a way in which people
in Europe have always settled issues amongst themselves.
The market, of course, is the most important area for competition. In traditional cultures, trade was often seen as unworthy of human beings – after all,
it seemingly creates no added value. It took the European Enlightenment to
award positive status to the open market. The market can harmonise the selfish
interests and abilities of individuals so that their selfish actions serve the interests of society. The market thus establishes links of interest among members
of the public – in order to satisfy my own needs, I am interested in your ability
to satisfy yours. The market causes each person to do exactly that which creates
the greatest public benefit. That is why there are efforts to prevent all artificial
limitations against the free circulation of goods and services in modern economies. Only then can the perfect harmonisation of individual interests and
abilities be ensured. Since the times of Adam Smith, this is an idea which has
been applied at the international level to oppose high customs tariffs, monopolies, etc. Artificial limitations on competition mean opposition to the equal
and just procedures which the free market creates in society.
To be sure, the idea of free market competition has not been without its intensive opponents. Socialists of various types have tried to prove that ceaseless
competition is dangerous to social solidarity. Conservatives, for their part, have
claimed that market principles destroy public morals and the natural hierarchical and organic order which society has accepted for time eternal. There are
many arguments which lead societies to seek protection against the excessive
involvement of market principles in spheres which operate on the basis of other,
non-commercial logic. Examples include culture, social care and education. One
of the greatest achievements of post-war Western Europe is based specifically
in this understanding – a flexible and free market economy which is, nevertheless,
socially responsible. Competition and the market are still seen quite positively in
Europe, but that belief is accompanied by the understanding that the market is
not a cure to all ills. The market economy promises welfare, responsibility and
justice, but if it is to achieve these goals, it must be rooted in specific political
and social institutions. The process demands democratic responsibility among
those who are in power. Political decisions must be transparent, and social policies must be sensible. Otherwise the market can cause very different results –
segregation, authoritarian yearnings and new forms of exclusion.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 34

34

IVARS IJABS

Free time
People are so busy today that it can almost seem problematic that one European value has always focused on the free time of individuals. In other words,
Europe has always attached a great deal of value to the amount of time during
which people can decide on what they will do and not be subject to the demands of reproduction. Over the last century, this value has manifested itself
most thoroughly in the eight-hour working day. That is why Latvia, as a European
country, probably could never implement the ‘tiger leap’ scenario of countries
in South-eastern Asia. That ‘economic miracle’ was achieved largely as a result
of enormous burdens placed on the labour force. Umberto Eco has discussed this
specific aspect of European culture in the context of how well Asian students
do at Western universities. In the future, this may prove to be a serious obstacle
against European (and also American) competitiveness, and this is something
which must be considered in the context of the Lisbon Strategy.
Free time is a value which did not appear in Europe accidentally. It originated
in Ancient Greece with its prevailing ideal of autarchy. A free man is the man
who shapes and tends to himself. The Greek word sholç, from which the word
‘school’ comes, initially referred to free time – people can educate themselves if
they have free time. Ceaseless work in pursuit of material goals means enslaving
oneself. The individual becomes dependent on external and destructive things.
Of course, not everyone can be fully devoted to this moral ideal of caring for
oneself. This is a privilege for aristocrats, and it is a system which is based on
the consistently defined groups which make up the labour force – slaves, women
and foreigners. The individual for Greeks was a person only insofar as he had
these opportunities. During the Middle Ages, too, there was institutionalised
inactivity in the form of cloisters. This is a system which is still in place today,
albeit in different form. Interestingly, this idea of ‘creative indolence’ was still,
quite recently, very important in European academic life. The idea was based on
the conviction that a scientist would do the best work if there were no external
obligations and demands – the scientist must be allowed to do the research
work freely and without being disturbed.
To be sure, the modern era and, particularly, the Reformation have been
quite critical vis-à-vis this idea. The work ethos of capitalism and rationally
organised economies turned indolence into a defect – the mother of all vice.
Europe, however, did not get rid of free time because of these ideas. Free time

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 35

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

35

continued to exist in various forms. The Socialists of the 19th century insisted
on shorter working hours not to promote laziness, but rather so that people
could improve themselves and engage in leisure activities. A guaranteed amount
of free time in developed post-war Western Europe became one of those fundamental social values which are ensured for individuals by the state.
Certainly, that does not mean people always think that self-improvement is
the only way to spend free time. In the latter half of the 20th century, another
problem has been emphasised in this area, beginning with the so-called Frankfurt School.26 Expanded social guarantees increased the amount of free time
that is at the disposal of the individual, but the ability of the individual to
spend that free time freely is quite circumscribed. Free time (such as holidays)
is increasingly administered and ‘managed’ in accordance with the demands
of the cultural industry, the tourism industry, etc. There is less and less selfrealisation and creativity as free time is entrusted to professionals.

3. Cultural values
Christianity
Christianity is one of the most hotly debated aspects of European values.
This is truly a multi-layered issue. There is no question that Christianity appertains to Europe, but there is reason to question whether it is a value in the
same sense as the other values which are listed here. First of all, Christianity is
the root of many different social and cultural phenomena which can be quite
contradictory. Christian values, explanations and Holy Scriptures have been
referenced in Europe by everyone, including absolutists such as Richelieu,
democrats such as the Puritans who were America’s first colonists, and anarchists such as Tolstoy. Second, much of what we praise in Europe today emerged in
opposition to the political, social and cultural monopoly of the Christian
church. Do we need to mention anything other than the ideas of tolerance,
modern science and rationalism? It can be argued with reason that the denial
of Christianity which was typical of Europe during the age of the Enlightenment dialectically included many elements of Christianity within itself. Still,
to reduce the distinctly liberal, post-traditional and secular culture of Europe
to Christian values would mean ignoring the trends which have taken a stand
against the moral hegemony of Christianity over the course of the last three

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 36

36

IVARS IJABS

centuries. Third, Christian faith and ideas about that faith are quite diverse in
the present day. When the pope takes a stand on behalf of including the concept
of Christianity in the preamble of the European Constitutional Treaty, he is
thinking of a very specific form of Christianity – Roman Catholicism or, at least,
ecumenism that is overseen by the Catholics. That is not the Christianity of all of
Europe, of course. There are many other important branches of the Christian faith,
and they represent very different values. The influence of Judaism and Islam
in Europe should also not be underestimated.
This suggests that Christianity in Europe is not a separate value. It shapes
an important horizon for European culture and politics in very many respects,
but if it were to be turned into a politically defensible value which can be propagandised, that would probably not be compatible with other principles on which
modern Europe is based – principles such as secular humanism and tolerance.
Enlightenment
Like Christianity, the Enlightenment is more than a value in European culture.
The Enlightenment was an intellectual movement, one which still has a great
deal to do with European ideas about the relationship between individuals and
their society. The ideas of the Enlightenment, of course, are not the exclusive
property of Europe anymore. Ideas such as human rights and constitutionalism
have become elements of Western civilisation as such. There are a few authors
such as Himmelfarb who argue against the accustomed identification of the
Enlightenment with French and German culture,27 but the fact is that the origins
of the Enlightenment are still closely linked to the European world view.
One of the fundamental beliefs of the Enlightenment is still of decisive
importance in Europe – the idea that humanity can progress thanks to the
rationality of the human being. The ability to study the physical, biological and
social world, to shape and maintain rational political institutions – this ability
leads the human species toward welfare, justice and progress. This progress is
inevitable, and it is the duty of each individual to make his or her own contribution
toward it. That can best be achieved if we reject old and untested biases and
learn to rely only on our own minds. Kant described this as ‘escape from immaturity in which man finds himself for reasons of his own fault.’28 If someone
relies only on the ideas of others, then he or she is fundamentally immature –
such people have never learned to think for themselves.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 37

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

37

This belief is closely linked to another – that rational study of reality in the
form of science can bring humanity toward joy and welfare. Science must
reject moral and religious biases and devote itself entirely to a study of reality
that is based in mathematics and logic. The more we know about the world,
the better we will be able to structure it. There is no denying that despite the
cataclysms of the past century, this faith in human ability is still the defining
factor in the European world view.
The Enlightenment is also the origin of the belief that political institutions
must be harmonised with the aforementioned demands of the human mind
and of human autonomy. Traditional political institutions such as monarchies,
classes and church privileges must be subject to merciless rational evaluation.
The state and its political institutions are not the result of heavenly revelation,
they have been created by human beings through a so-called social contract,
and people themselves can transform them. Accordingly, the state must count
on the individual, it cannot take arbitrary or confusing decisions. The state must
be commensurate with human rationality. People have the right to change the
form of the state if it cannot be justified on the basis of common sense. Individuals have inalienable rights which the state may not violate, and these are
rights which are based in the individual’s autonomy and reason. Individual
rights and constitutionalism are unquestionable. This is the cornerstone for
understanding the politics of the Enlightenment, and this is a process which is
still of great importance in Europe.
The Enlightenment, on the other hand, does not mean democracy in and of
itself. Not everyone is sufficiently enlightened to take rational decisions about
the affairs of state. In the context of present-day Europe, however, another
postulate in the political theory of the Enlightenment is more important. That
is the idea that the individual citizen has the right and even the obligation to
criticise decisions that are taken by those who are in power and to express public
views about them. During and after the Enlightenment, unlike in earlier times,
criticism did not mean disrespect or denial. Criticism now means that individuals
with reason are moving together toward the best and the most rational solution.
In practice, this idea has been implemented in the sense of ‘the public
sphere’ and in the public evaluation of political decisions. In the Europe of the
Enlightenment, there has been a rapid increase in various forums for debate –
clubs, polemical press publications, and forms of political participation. Taken
together, these form a space in which people can freely exchange views about

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 38

38

IVARS IJABS

public and political issues. Public opinion in the modern sense of the concept
first appeared during the Enlightenment. It refers not just to the collection of
views that circulate in society, but also to a critical counterweight to the
authority and power of the state. Much has been written in recent times about
the loss of this critical function of openness – commercialised media have led
public opinion to become commercialised and easily manipulated, too. Critical
debate among rational individuals, thus, is an ideal, not the reality of the public
sphere. It may be, however, that the ideals of the Enlightenment have been so
effective and durable in Europe specifically for that reason – their full achievement
has always been quite infrequent.
Inner life
One of the values of Christian origin in Europe is the importance of the
individual’s inner life – this value still determines Europe’s world view. People
who have grown up in European culture may not feel that inner life is all that
distinct or important. Its meaning is revealed more completely if we encounter
non-Western cultures (Islam, the cultures of the Far East) and their representatives. Since the times of St Augustine, Europe has attached a great deal of
importance to the individual’s inner life. The idea is that the true essence of the
individual is found not in his or her social status or external actions, but, instead,
in the soul, in the interior which is truly accessible only to the individual.29
This is what ensures true harmony between the individual and the world
order – external manifestations are only the consequence of this harmony. This
is what differs the Christian European culture from the culture of Islam, where
external activities, in accordance with religious ideas, are moral achievements
in and of themselves. In European culture, by contrast, the authenticity of the
individual is granted great importance – the individual’s inner truth, belief in
oneself, life in accordance with oneself, etc. This is indicated in the ideal of
self-realisation which is so important in the West today, no matter how foggy
that concept really might be.
Emphasis on the inner self does not mean that external and sentient reality
is denied or scorned. Absolutely not, but one’s inner self is a point of reference
for any evaluation of external and sentient reality. One also finds the idea that
despite the privileged role of the inner life, the human being tends to ‘scatter’
himself or herself among external things, yielding before the temptations and

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 39

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

39

noise of external life. People must occasionally return to their inner selves, their
authentic essence. If one wishes to be authentic, one must be able to distance
oneself from the ‘noise of the world.’
European culture, however, is not particularly focused on introspection, on
ceaseless study of oneself. In this sense, the meditative and ascetic practices of
India are clearly superior. Europe is more characterised by endless tensions
between the ‘inner’ and the ‘external’ individual. There is always problematic
interaction between these two, and this issue has been interpreted in very
different ways during various phases of European history.
This is an idea which is rooted in religious anthropology, and it has had a
serious effect on European culture. Worth mentioning are just a few phenomena –
diaries, the history of the still life, the importance of the conscience in European ethics, the emphasis on unique experience in the art of the period of
Romanticism, etc. The inner life is also a political phenomenon. It is the origin
of our ideas about the relationship which exists between the public and the
private, about the need to respect each individual’s conscience and to ensure
that individual’s right to a private life.
Irony
Irony is one of the values of contemporary Europe, both in human contacts
and in cultural processes overall. Irony does not refer to the disability to treat
things seriously or to twist reality in a conscious way. Instead, it refers to the
ability to distance oneself from one’s own perspective, and to understand that
one’s views are accidental. Europeans understand that things could seem
quite different from another perspective. At the same time, they do not have
access to other perspectives, so they have to make do with the one that they
have, simultaneously not forgetting that it is by no means the only perspective
or even, perhaps, the most complete perspective. Nietzsche wrote about this
typically European ability. He called it ‘the pathos of distance.’ Irony in this
sense involves the ability to distance oneself from seemingly self-evident explanations and evaluations. European mentality always leads one to remember
that everything could be different, and before we express categorical judgments
about others, we must remember where we ourselves are. Irony involves
distrust of simple solutions – the world has become too complex to be viewed
from just one perspective.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 40

40

IVARS IJABS

This irony is often found in thoughts about European identity. On the one
hand, European mentality has long been typified by something which Derrida
calls ‘Euro-centrism’. This is the belief that Europe (which, in fact, is a large
peninsula of the Asian continent) represents all that is universal and humane,
it represents the totality of human progress. The European is the most complete
form of the individual, and others must seek to compare themselves to Europeans if they wish to be civilised, sensible and moral beings. Europe today clearly
wishes to rid itself of this imagined privilege – it is rejected in the names of
European ideals themselves. Europeans are the only ones for whom ‘Eurocentrism’ is a problem – Africans and the Chinese do not know such concepts,
they are uncommon among Americans, too. On the other hand, Europe wants
to find new unity and a common self-understanding today, although it more
often encounters various differences and diversities. Thus the search for a European identity is based on a denial of a Euro-centric identity, and this situation
itself is unquestionably ironic.
Historicity
The portal of the building which houses the National Archives of the
United States bears the text ‘The Past is a Prologue’. This is a statement which
allows us to define a specific form of European difference. In Europe, the past
is something more than a prologue to the future. History is a form through which
European culture explains social, political and cultural phenomena. European
thinking is characterised by the belief that one can understand a process if one
looks at its historical development. Hegel was the first to suggest this approach in Europe. History tells human beings about the logic of the world’s
structure, and it is the job of these human beings to learn to explain it – nothing
more. The European needs history not only because it allows one to learn about
the experience of others and to learn from their mistakes, but also because
history offers a look into the meaning of phenomena and allows us to understand where we are. For illustration, we can mention the important role which
Europeans attach to historical disciplines of science – the history of philosophy
in philosophy and the history of sociological thought in sociology.
The emphasis on history has often served as a justification for accusations
of conservatism. This is not entirely valid – the status of an heir to historical
development sometimes causes one to become immune against new ideas or

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 41

The Dimension of Values in European Integration

41

courageous solutions. At the same time, we cannot really deny that for Europeans, history can also serve as a reason for quite radical change. The Holocaust, for instance, left such deep tracks in German and European mentality
specifically because this massive crime was in complete contradiction to the
idea of European ideals which had emerged for such a long time before – that
the European is humane, rational and supportive of individual rights. History
is more than a collection of memories, it also calls on us to seek out new identities.
The role of history in the search for a European identity can be explained
through practical considerations, as well – history still distinguishes Europe
among all other regions of the world. Modern civilisation, which has spread all
around the world today, found its origins in Europe and nowhere else. It must
be said, therefore, that Europe and its values are in something of the situation
of King Lear. The best daughters – political democracy, modern science and a
capitalist economy – have already departed to become universally recognised
achievements of civilisation. For that reason, history is and will remain Europe’s
strong side.

References and notes
1 Kaube, J. Are We Reasonable? In: Old Europe, New Europe, Core Europe. Transatlantic Relations

after the Iraq War. London, New York. 2005, pp. 53–60, at p. 54.
2 The Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, liberty, democracy,

equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights. These values are common to the
Member States in a society of pluralism, tolerance, justice, solidarity and non-discrimination.
Draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, Article 2 ‘Union’s Values’.
3 Puriòð, G. Thoughts About the Future of Europe: From Market to Country. In this compendium, p. 278.
4 Taylor, C. The Ethics of Authenticity. Cambridge, London, 1991, p. 31ff.
5 See Markovits, A.S. Anti-Americanism in Europe: From Elite Disdain to Political Force. In:
Old Europe, New Europe…, op. cit., pp. 198–207.
6 Sontag, S. Literature is Freedom. In: Old Europe, New Europe, op. cit., p. 209.
7 Puriòð, G. op cit., p .....
8 See, e.g., Mouffe, C. (ed.). Dimensions of Radical Democracy. Pluralism, Citizenship, Community. London, 1992.
9 Kant, I. On the common saying: That may be correct in theory, but it is of no use in practice.
In: Kants, I. Kas ir apgaismîba [ What is Enlightenment?]. Latvian translation by I. Ðuvajevs.
Rîga, 2005, pp. 95–97.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 42

42

IVARS IJABS

10 See, e.g., Preuss, U. K. The Iraq War: Critical Reflections from Old Europe. In: Old Europe,

New Europe, op. cit., pp. 167–185.
11 See, e.g., Meier, C. Die griechisch-römisch Tradition. In: Die kulturellen Werte Europas.

Hrsg. von Joas, H. und Wigandt, K. Frankfurt/M, 2005, pp. 93–116.
12 Szücs, J. Three Historical Regions of Europe. In: Keane, J. (ed.). Civil Society and the State.

New York: Verso, 1988, pp. 291–232.
13 See, e.g., Habermas, J. Remarks on Dieter Grimm’s ‘Does Europe Need a Constitution?’

European Law Journal, Vol. 1. No. 3. 1995, pp. 303–307.
14 Eco, U. An Uncertain Europe Between Rebirth and Decline. In: Old Europe, New Europe,

op. cit., pp. 14–20, at p. 16.
15 Schuman, R. Eiropai (For Europe), introduction by Vaira Vîíe-Freiberga. Rîga, pp. 22–23.
16 See Habermas, op. cit., pp. 305–306.
17 Puriòð, op. cit., p. 10.
18 See, e.g., Polanyi, K. The Great Transformation. Boston, 2001, pp. 35–230.
19 Puriòð, op. cit., p. 18.
20 See Weber, M. Protestant Ethics and the Spirit of Capitalism. In: Weber, M. Sociology of

Religion. Latvian translation by R. Kûlis, pp. 20–180.
21 Þiþek, S. The Post-Political Denkverbot. In: Pejic, B. and D. Elliot (eds.). After the Wall. Art

and Culture in Post-Communist Europe. Vol. 1. Stockholm, 1999, p. 92.
22 Puriòð, op. cit., p. 10.
23 De Tocqueville, A. Democracy in America. Translation by G. Lawrence. New York, 1988,

p. 506ff.
24 MacPherson, C.B. The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism. Hobbes to Locke. Oxford,

1962.
25 Giddens, A. The Third Way. Renewal of Social Democracy. London, 1994, pp. 34–37.
26 See, particularly, Horkheimer, M. and Adorno, T.W. Dialektik der Aufklärung. Philosophische

Fragmente. Mit einem Nachwort von Jürgen Habermas. Frankfurt/M, 1986, pp. 128–176.
27 Himmelfarb, G. The Roads to Modernity. The British, French and American Enlightenments.

New York, 2004.
28 Kant, op. cit., p. 15.
29 Flasch, K. Wert der Innerlichkeit. In: Die kulturellen Werte Europas. Hrsg. von Joas, H. und

Wigandt, K. Frankfurt/M, 2005, pp. 219–236.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 43

TOMS ROSTOKS

Debates about the Future of the European
Constitutional Treaty During a Period of Reflection1
Yet eagerness for a finished constitution may actually hold up progress.2
David Mitrany, 1943

The European Constitutional Treaty has much to do with the future of the
European Union. It would not be proper to view the future of the EU exclusively
in the context of the Constitutional Treaty, however, as it is shaped by many
issues, not just institutional restructuring. Neither can it be said that the
Constitutional Treaty is an unnecessary document, because it would have introduced changes which leaders of EU Member States and governments had
agreed were necessary.
In the late May and early June of 2005, the European Constitutional Treaty
(ECT) was discussed to a greater extent than had ever been the case before.
That was not because of the content of the treaty, but rather because within just
a few days, it was rejected by two EU Member States in referenda. What is
more, the rejection came from countries which were among the six original
founders of the EU. They had never been seen as countries in which ratification
might prove to be a big problem.3 The confusion which followed the French
and Dutch referenda was declared to be the beginning of a period of reflection
at a meeting of the Council of the European Union in June 2005. Leaders called
not only for a discussion about what to do with the ECT, but also for a broader
debate as to what the European Union’s residents expect of it.
The aim in this paper is to assess debates about the future of the ECT which
occurred in EU Member States between June 2005 and the autumn of 2006.
First, a brief description will be offered of the current situation with ratification,
looking also at the foundations for the crisis that has occurred.4 Next there will
be a consideration of initiatives and views proposed by EU Member States and
institutions as to whether Member States should or should not continue to
ratify the ECT. The third section will be devoted to various possible scenarios

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 44

44

TOMS ROSTOKS

on the basis of the aforementioned initiatives and viewpoints, looking particularly at how events might develop in 2007.

1. The existing situation with ratification
and the essence of the problem
Ratification of the ECT was hindered from the very beginning by the fact that
confirmation of the treaty had to occur in 25 Member States and in 25 different
ways. There was much public discussion about those countries which required
a referendum for ratification and those in which ratification was the job for
national parliaments. This is not really a proper comparison, because in many
countries which were assigned to one or another of the aforementioned camps,
the process of ratification was, in fact, far more complex than might have
seemed at first glance.5 Still, the overall division was between countries with
referenda and those with parliamentary ratification (Table 1).
Table 1

Division of countries by method of the ECT ratification6
National referenda

Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Ireland, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom

Parliamentary vote

Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Slovenia, Slovakia, Sweden

The division which is shown in Table 1 allowed experts to make assumptions
about those countries which might face the greatest difficulties in the ratification process. The content of the treaty was agreed by an intergovernmental
conference, and so there was no real reason to believe that any parliamentary
vote on ratification would be a problem. The main question focused on those
10 countries which were to hold a referendum. Even as the treaty was being
drafted it could be predicted that the biggest difficulties might occur in the
United Kingdom. The Czech Republic and Poland were also mentioned as
potentially problematic countries.7 As the process developed, France and the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 45

45

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

Netherlands were added to this list. After the referenda in the two countries
had taken place, also Denmark, where voters had rejected the Maastricht
Treaty, was considered to be a difficult case.
The rejection of the treaty in France and then, a few days later, in the Netherlands was certainly a heavy blow to the ratification process. It did not end, however, and several countries have ratified the ECT since the two referenda
(Table 2).
Table 2

Ratification of the ECT in EU Member States8
Ratification before French referendum Lithuania, Hungary, Slovenia, Spain, Italy,
Austria, Slovakia9, Belgium, Greece, Germany
Ratification rejected

France, Netherlands

Ratification since Dutch referendum

Latvia, Luxembourg, Estonia, Cyprus, Malta,
Finland

No ratification yet

Poland, Czech Republic, Portugal, United
Kingdom, Ireland, Sweden, Denmark

Most of the countries which have not ratified the ECT have simply suspended
any consideration of the issue. This, to a certain extent, contradicts a paragraph
in the treaty which refers to a situation in which one or more countries refuse
to ratify the treaty. The idea is that at the conclusion of the entire ratification
process, the European Council is to meet so that heads of state and government can decide on what to do next. According to this, the ratification process
should proceed, and only afterward, depending on how many EU Member
States have ratified the ECT, should a collective decision be taken on how to
proceed. The authors of the treaty have been praised for their far-sightedness
in providing for the possibility that one or more Member States might not
ratify it, but that is somewhat pointless, as it is very difficult to imagine a
European leader who would attend a meeting of the Council and vote to ratify
the ECT after his or her people have rejected it in a referendum.10 It is only
logical, therefore, that other countries have decided to wait until a solution to
the ECT issue is defined.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

46

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 46

TOMS ROSTOKS

What is the essence of the ratification crisis? The scope of this paper does
not make it possible to cover all problems related to ECT ratification, so reasons
for the dissatisfaction of people in France, the Netherlands and other countries
shall not be reviewed here – that is the subject for other research projects. The
essence of the ratification-related problems involves a dilemma which has
appeared among those countries which wish to continue the ratification
process and those which have not done so and/or do not wish to do so. On the
one hand, 16 EU Member States have ratified the ECT, and it is clear that it will
not be easy to ‘kill’ it if anyone wants to do so. On the other hand, two countries
have rejected the treaty, and ratification in others has been postponed to an
unknown point in the future. During the last 18 months, many people have
said that the ECT is too full of ambition and that it is not really all that important
from the perspective of the EU’s future, but that is not really true. Most political
leaders in the EU Member States admit that rather sooner than later the EU will
have to engage in some institutional restructuring.
We can conclude that this is not a black-and-white issue, because between
the desire to continue the ratification process and the desire to ‘bury’ it, there
is a wide area in which solutions to the problem are being sought. None of the
countries which have not ratified the ECT have indicated that they plan to do
so in the near future. Progress could occur in 2007, but it is becoming increasingly
clear that no simple solution to the ECT ratification crisis is available. This
means an evaluation of the existing situation with respect to proposals from
Member States as to what should be done. The proposals from Member States
and EU institutions will have to be reviewed so as to come up with qualified
assumptions about how the ratification process might develop further.
Let us now turn to the positions taken by EU Member States and institutions vis-à-vis ratification of the ECT, focusing also on proposals that have been
made as to further movement in this regard. These proposals serve as the basis
for the third section of the paper, where possible solutions will be considered.

2. Solutions proposed by Member States and institutions
More than a year has passed since the Council of the European Union declared its period of transition, and so the time has come to look at the thinking
of EU Member States and institutions about the ECT during this process. Only

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 47

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

47

then can the importance of the treaty in the future visions of the EU really be
assessed. It must be admitted, that countries have used differently the period
of reflection, and the activities have been quite varied. In some cases, the
transition period has been declared to be a period of inaction. The review of
Member States and institutions was structured as follows: first, consideration
was given to what Member States did during the transition period; then the
focus was on the initiatives of EU institutions since the French and Dutch
referenda. EU Member States can be divided up into four categories in terms
of their activities during the proclaimed period of reflection.11
1. Countries which have ratified the ECT and have not displayed any
significant activity during the period of reflection
This group includes Greece,12 Slovenia,13 Cyprus,14 Malta15 and Luxembourg.16 Their investment in the process of ratification and reflection stopped
with ratification, and none of these countries has produced any significant
initiatives as to what should be done about the ECT in the future. Neither have
these countries been active participants in debates about the future of the EU,
and in most cases, they have focused little attention on the provision of public
information about EU issues. These are countries which do not have sufficient
political weight to promote any initiatives in this regard, but they also tend to
be the ones in which there are no domestic debate about EU issues. The view is
that it would be better for the initiative to come from other countries.
2. Countries which have ratified the ECT and have also come forward
with significant initiatives and/or have demonstrated significant activity
during the reflection period
Here we are speaking of Lithuania,17 Hungary,18 Italy,19 Austria,20 Slovakia,21
Belgium,22 Germany,23 Spain,24 Latvia,25 Estonia26 and Finland27 – these are
countries which have ratified the treaty and have offered significant initiatives
vis-à-vis the future of the ECT, or else have engaged in active debates about the
future of the EU. Some of the countries in this group are small, and during the
course of the period of reflection, they have engaged in active discussions
about the future of the EU. Austria is included in this group, because during
the first half of 2006 it was the presiding country in the EU. Belgium’s presence
in the group was dictated by an initiative on closer integration which was

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

48

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 48

TOMS ROSTOKS

proposed by Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt, as well as by fairly lively debates about the ECT and the future of the EU.
Inclusion of Spain in the first group of countries could be questioned, because
issues concerning the ECT and the future of the EU are not really important
there. Spain, however, is a large country, and its views will be important in
2007, when Germany makes proposals as to how best to resolve the ECT crisis.
That is why the author has chosen to list it in the second group. There was an
election in Italy in the spring of 2006, so not very much information was
focused on the future of the EU and the matter of the ECT. Since the election,
however, the new head of government has been a former president of the
European Commission, Romano Prodi, and this suggests that the country will
play a more active role in the future.
Debates about the ECT have been very weak in Slovakia, but the country is
listed in the second group as a result of the fact that a convincing parliamentary
vote in favour of the ECT still did not complete ratification of the document. A
group of people from Slovakia’s civil society have appealed the ratification
before the country’s Constitutional Court, asking it to rule whether a referendum
should have been organised. This essentially indicates that debates about the
ECT are ongoing in Slovakia. It is unlikely that the Constitutional Court will
issue a ruling before the time when there could be further movement in the EU
with regard to the treaty, and there is also the possibility that the ruling might
be more political than legal in nature.
Germany is the country upon which the greatest hopes are resting, because
it has sufficient political weight to take leadership. What is more, Germany is
presiding in the EU in the first half of 2007. Berlin has been less than generous
with proposals, limiting itself to announcements that it supports further ratification of the treaty. There is no doubt, however, that Germany will make
further proposals during its presidency, not least because Finland, which was
the previous presiding country, has collected information about the views of
Member States on the matter of the ECT.
3. Countries which have not ratified the ECT and have been inactive
during the period of reflection
In countries of the third group, the political elite and/or members of the public
have negative views about the ECT, or else there have been no significant

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 49

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

49

debates about the future of the treaty and the EU during the period for reflection. Countries in this group include Sweden,28 the Netherlands,29 Poland,30
Portugal31 and the Czech Republic.32 Sweden is in the third group because it
has not ratified the ECT. No proposals have been made as to what to do in
response to the crisis, and there have been no real public debates about the
future of the EU. This is in part because there was an election in Sweden in the
autumn of 2006, and the political agenda was full of other issues. The Swedish
government in office prior to the election supported the ECT and considered it
to be a balanced and useful document. It has been suggested, however, that
Sweden prefers a resolution to specific problems, as opposed to debates about
the EU long-term developmental visions, complete with endless quarrels about
the best institutional structure for the Union.
The Netherlands is a country in which the European Constitutional Treaty
has been stricken from the public agenda. The government feels that no matter
what happens during the period of reflection, it will not change its view on the
ECT. It does not deny that EU institutions will have to be restructured, but because the results of the Dutch referendum were received with such seriousness,
the government has no plan to discuss the current text of the treaty or any
other version thereof. The Dutch are not debating the ECT or the future of the
EU, but the government is trying to learn more about what local residents think
of the EU.
Ratification of the treaty in Poland is made difficult by the fact that Warsaw
considers the ECT to be harmful to the country’s national interests if it is
compared to the Treaty of Nice. That means that the process of ratification
would be fraught even though most Poles have a positive opinion of the EU as such.
During the period of reflection, the Polish government has not demonstrated
any real initiative in terms of debates about the future of the EU, to say nothing
of the ECT. Parties in the governing coalition do not support the treaty.
Initiatives from the civil society and the academic environment have not been
powerful enough to launch any real debate of the ECT and the future of Europe.
Portugal planned a referendum on ECT ratification, but it has now been
postponed for an indeterminate period of time. The Portuguese government
has said that ratification will involve a referendum if EU heads of state and
government take a collective decision to restart the ratification process. Portugal
is in the third group of countries because there have been no major debates about
the ECT and the future of the EU. The period of reflection was interpreted as

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

50

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 50

TOMS ROSTOKS

an opportunity to consider the causes of the crisis. In June 2006, the period was
extended at least until the summer of 2007, because Portugal will take over the
presidency of the EU in the second half of the year. That means that Portugal
may soon shift to the fourth group of countries. The Portuguese government
has generally positive attitude to the ECT, but it does not think it very likely at
all that the document will ever be ratified. Portugal has also questioned the
idea of a Europe of projects.
The Czech Republic is in the third group of countries because it has not ratified
the ECT and has no plan to do so in the foreseeable future. There have been no
major debates about the future of the EU, and there has been no real activity
during the period of reflection. An election was held in the Czech Republic in
2006, and the future of the ECT and the EU was not of much interest during
the campaign season. It has to be noted that no real debate emerged after the
election either, because the 200-seat Czech parliament has split exactly in half,
with 100 seats going to the former governing coalition and 100 to the former
opposition. A temporary government was installed pending a resolution to the
situation. The bottom line is that the ECT is of no real interest to the people of
the Czech Republic at all. Overall views, moreover, tend to skew toward the
negative, and so a referendum would be a fairly certain way of scuttling the
treaty altogether.
4. Countries which have not ratified the ECT but have developed
significant initiatives and/or have engaged
in extensive activities during the period of reflection
Here we refer to the United Kingdom,33 Denmark,34 France35 and Ireland.36
In the United Kingdom, there are negative views as to the ECT both in the
political elite and in the public at large, but during the latter half of 2005, the UK
was the presiding country of the EU, and London introduced its presidency by
announcing that a new debate about the future of the EU was necessary. The
Conservatives who are in opposition and the Labour Party which is in power
agree that the ECT is dead, but the difference between the two parties is that
Labourists have still been talking about the idea that institutional reforms are
needed in the EU. The British government does not support the current
version of the treaty, but it does believe that certain changes in the institutional
architecture of the EU are necessary. This view is based in part on the British
presidency of the EU.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 51

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

51

Denmark is a country in which comparatively intensive debates have occurred during the reflection period as to the future of the EU. Prime Minister
Anders Fogh Rasmussen has suggested that the best solution to the ECT crisis
would be a ‘mini-Constitution’, one which would address the EU’s most important institutional functions and future challenges. Denmark supports the
idea that the ECT should be implemented in a gradual way, and it supports
the resulting ideas about Europe.
In France, no serious political party feels that another referendum could be
held on the existing version of the ECT. During the period of reflection, there
have been lively debates about the EU and the future of the ECT in France. The
debates suggest that France supports the idea of a Europe of projects, one which
would allow the people of the EU to understand the practical benefits of the
Union’s existence. With respect to the ECT, the view is gradually developing
that either there must be work on a new treaty, or just the first and, perhaps
second part of the current treaty should be ratified.
Ireland, for its part, feels that there is no point in ratifying the ECT until the
situation which emerged in June 2005 is resolved. The government supports
ratification of the treaty, and during the period of reflection, government,
academic and non-governmental institutions have all taken active part in debating the future of the EU.
The European Parliament (EP) and European Commission (EC) are important
political entities at the EU level, and so a review of initiatives, views and
proposals would not be exhaustive if only the Member State positions vis-à-vis
the ECT were reviewed. The EP and EC wish to be important participants in the
development of EU policy, and it is also true that several Member States point
to the two institutions as the required source of proposals on resolving crisis.
The EP’s position on the ECT is clear and unequivocal. In January 2006, the
EP voted to renew the ratification process while also proposing that there be a
series of discussions with members of national parliaments in the various Member
States. The EP supports the current version of the ECT, and in a resolution which
was approved in June 2006, it declared the ECT to be a ‘global compromise.’
The EP disagrees that the treaty should be implemented bit by bit, and it does
not support any proposals to that effect. It is recognised that France and the
Netherlands will not organise a new referendum on the current version of the
ECT, but the EP still feels that the process of ratification must be continued so
that by mid-2007, the treaty has been ratified by at least 20 Member States. In

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

52

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 52

TOMS ROSTOKS

that case 80% of Member States would have ratified the treaty, and heads of
state and government would certainly have to decide on future steps. As noted,
most of the Member States which have not ratified the ECT have no intention
at this time of doing so in the near future, but the EP has called on those countries
to announce their future plans for the period of reflection, as well as when
they might ratify the ECT.
EP support for the current version of the ECT could be explained by virtue
of the fact that its norms would enhance the role of the EP in the legislative
process. It must be said, however, that there is no unanimity in the European
Parliament as to this issue. The relevant resolution was approved, but only by
a vote of 347 in favour, 212 opposed, and 70 abstaining. This indicates that more
than one-third of MEPs either do not have a strict position on the matter, or
they do not support the placement of pressure on the European Council or the
Member States.37 It is not precisely known why so many MEPs voted against
the resolution or abstained, but it may be that they simply did not support the
treaty as such, or that MEPs have no faith that the countries which have not
ratified the treaty will end up doing so at some point in the future.
The European Commission does not have a unified position vis-à-vis the
ECT, and for a long time it avoided making any precise statements about the
future of the treaty. The most important EC contribution during the period of
reflection has been ‘Plan-D’,38 which was launched in October 2005. This plan
is meant not just for the period of reflection, but work on it did begin after the
European Council said in June 2005 that the period must be one of discussion
involving political parties, social partners, parliaments and the civil society.39
There have been various responses to ‘Plan-D’, because some people see it as
an opportunity to take part in debates about the future of Europe, while others
take it as yet another example of the EC’s bureaucratic approach to life. There
have also been requests for the broader involvement of the EU’s residents in
the Union’s political processes from the academic environment. Scholars have
called for the establishment of a community of citizens or a new and democratic
convention, but these initiatives have not won widespread support. ‘Plan-D’,
moreover, can only partially be seen as an attempted investment in resolving
the ECT crisis.
During the period of reflection, the EC has not taken a unified position on
ratification of the ECL. The president of the EC, José Manuel Barroso, has
suggested that he supports implementation of certain elements of the treaty if

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 53

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

53

ratification of the full document proves to be impossible. In the latter half of
2006, however, the EC’s overall views about the ECT slowly became visible.
The commissioner for communications, Margot Wallström, has said that the
Commission wants the solution to the ECT issue to be based on the existing
treaty and that the first and second parts of the treaty should remain unchanged. Commissioner Wallström has particularly emphasised that there
should be no new negotiations about issues which proved to be particularly
difficult to agree on during the intergovernmental conference.40 This applies to
the membership of the EC and the distribution of votes in the Council of Ministers. It has to be noted that the EC position is not in line with that taken by
certain French politicians and EU Member States, but it is quite similar to the
views which have been expressed by Germany. Assuming that referenda
would be organised on a new version of the treaty not just in France and the
Netherlands, but also in the other remaining EU Member States, the focus now
must be on how to make the current version of the ECT more attractive in the
eyes of EU residents. One proposal is to address issues which are significant to
Europeans – the fight against climate change, for instance. Still, it is too early
to talk of any specific activities in this regard.

3. What to do with the ‘comatose’ ETC?41
As noted before, 2007 is going to be an interesting year for the EU and its
Member States, because Germany will take the presidency of the Union in the
first half of the year, and a presidential election will be held in France.42 The
issue of the ECT and the difficulties which have occurred in ratifying it lead one
to think about the structure of EU governance. If Germany comes up with new
ideas on the resolution of crisis, it will still be true that the governance of the
EU is, to a certain extent, accidental. It is just a coincidence that Germany is the
presiding country ‘at the right moment.’ We can only imagine the consequences
if the presidency was held by a country which has not ratified the ECT and
does not intend to do so, or by a country that has tried to ratify the treaty but
has failed in the attempt. What about the presidency of a country which
merely does not have enough political weight? One must not exaggerate the
ability of the presiding country of the EU to influence the Union’s political
agenda, but leadership by a country which does not want the ECT ratification

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

54

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 54

TOMS ROSTOKS

process to move further at all would destroy the treaty without much effort.
During its presidency, for instance, Britain tried to turn the debate about the
ECT into a discussion about the EU future. A British member of the European
Parliament, Andrew Duff, has claimed that during its presidency, the UK
did absolutely nothing to resolve the ‘constitutional crisis.’43 It can be argued
that the difficulty in ratifying the ECT makes clear, in and of itself, that there
must be institutional reforms in the EU so as to overcome the refusal of
individual Member States to deal with issues that are unpleasant or uninteresting to them.
Two major positions have emerged in the context on importance of future
EU institutional restructuring. One vision stresses the significance of institutional restructuring although it is not a unified whole, of course, within it there
are lots of different views about what kinds of restructuring are needed, how
quickly this should happen and how extensive the restructuring should be.
Valéry Giscard D’Estaing, the former president of France who chaired the EU
Convention, feels that Europe must first reform its institutions. He argues that
unless institutional shortcomings are reversed, any attempt to focus on policy
will fail. From this perspective, the ECT is a key to further development of the
EU – without it, practical issues cannot be handled at the level of overall
policy.
The opposite end of the spectrum of views is represented by British Prime
Minister Tony Blair, who would prefer to neglect the ECT and focus on practical
issues instead. This was made very clear when the prime minister appeared
before the European Parliament when Britain took over the EU’s presidency.44
Blair and those who agree with him argue that EU Member States should not
attempt to define the ‘only proper’ institutional framework for the Union.
Instead, they should focus on specific projects which allow people to believe
that they really need the EU, ones which make a significant investment in the
betterment of human welfare. It appears that the problems related to ECT
ratification have also forced French President Jacques Chirac to support the
idea of ‘a Europe of projects’.45
Researchers have proposed various ECT crisis-resolving scenarios, and these
largely depend on each researcher’s view as to what is and what is not possible
in the existing situation. Similar alternatives are proposed in many scenarios,
but the ideas of researchers as to the most likely result of the process are very
divergent. Some believe that the ECT is ‘dead’, others think that ratification

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 55

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

55

both should be and can be continued. Still others think that none of the proposed solutions is possible in political or legal terms. They question whether
the crisis can be resolved at all. This suggests that the ECT crisis has not been
reviewed in isolation from the overall development of the EU, and that means
that the crisis might ‘overflow’ its boundaries and threaten the future of the
EU as a political union. Katinka Barysch has listed three possible scenarios for
resolving the ECT ‘problem’, while other authors have drafted more detailed
scenarios. Sebastian Kurpas and Justus Schönlau, for instance, have defined
five possible ways in which the ECT crisis can be resolved.
This author has his own views as to the future of the ECT and how it might
affect the future of the EU. The following scenarios are based on a sampling of
research.
1. The ratification process continues
This position is taken by most of the countries which have already ratified
the ECT. Ratification, indeed, continued even after the referenda in the Netherlands and France. Five Member States have ratified the treaty since June 2005,
but there are others which certainly are not prepared to do so. This first scenario
speaks to a continuation in the ratification process until at least 80% of EU
Member States have ratified the treaty. In that case the European Council would
have to take a decision on what to do with the treaty and the Member States
which have not ratified it.
There are several problems with this alternative. First of all, it seems very
unlikely in purely political terms right now that 80% of the EU Member States
will ratify the ECT. Second, a decision by the European Council on the future
of the treaty would have to be taken anonymously, and any one country could
veto such a decision. Even if governments were prepared to accept the ECT
unanimously, as was the case when the treaty was signed at Rome in the autumn
of 2004, there would still be a question as to the referendum results in France
and the Netherlands. It is entirely possible, too, that some other Member State
might still hold a referendum in which voters reject the ECT. Third, there would
be the question of the legal consequences of such a unanimous decision, because the ‘no’ vote in France had both political and legal consequences. The
legal issue could be handled via another referendum, but it is politically impossible to organise a second vote on the exact text that has once been rejected.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

56

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 56

TOMS ROSTOKS

Among France’s leading politicians, none has even suggested that a second
referendum might be organised.
The aforementioned difficulties do not, however, mean that the possibility
of further ECT ratification can be totally excluded. EU leaders have agreed to
extend the period for ratification and agreed that in the spring of 2007 Germany will make new proposals vis-à-vis the destiny of the treaty, so at least
theoretically it is possible that the ECT will eventually be ratified by all countries,
albeit, possibly, with small changes.46 True, French and Dutch politicians have
demonstrated no particular enthusiasm as to further ratification of the current
text of the treaty, but proposals have been made to supplement the text with a
social protocol. That would be aimed at soothing down voters, because many
people in France and the Netherlands voted against the treaty in the belief that
it would threaten their social systems. According to Kurpas and Schönlau, an
additional protocol would not resolve all of the relevant problems, and it might
create new ones. If the social protocol were simply a declarative document, it
might be less than convincing. If it included legal requirements, it would have
to be ratified by those countries which have already ratified the ECT. That
would create additional complications. The inclusion of a social protocol, moreover, might create even greater scepticism in the United Kingdom, where the
ECT is already seen as a product aimed at ensuring the survival of the persistent
social systems which prevail in France and Germany. This would be unacceptable to British voters. In short, most of the surveyed authors feel that further
ratification of the treaty is quite unlikely, if not impossible.
As noted before, the idea of a ‘Europe of projects’ has also arisen in the context of further ratification of the ECT or the implementation of just some of its
parts. Various versions of this idea have been presented in France, the United
Kingdom and the European Commission. The idea is that the EU is used as a
framework for intergovernmental projects both during the period of reflection
and afterward so as to renew voter trust in the idea that the EU is necessary
and that its existence provides true benefits. A Europe of projects is an attractive
concept, but then one has to ask whether the development of the EU has not
always been based on projects. Major integration projects implemented by EU
Member States include things such as the unified market, enlargement of the
EU and introduction of the euro. These have been quite successful, but perhaps they have been too successful. The idea of a Europe of projects is too
general at this time, because there are no plans as to which projects might be

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 57

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

57

pursued, and it is not very likely that Member States would find it easy to agree
on specific projects or priorities.47 There is also no guarantee that successful
projects in the area of further integration would encourage people to vote in
favour of the ECT or a similar document in the future.
2. The ECT is ‘buried’
It is clear that this would be the preference of those countries in which
ratification of the ECT would be hard or impossible in the current political
situation.48 Countries in this group include the United Kingdom, Poland, the
Czech Republic, the Netherlands and Sweden. These are countries which neither
want ratification of the existing text to continue, nor a new version of the ECT,
arguing that the EU has other problems to resolve instead. When it comes to
innovations in the ECT, these countries feel that most can be introduced
through existing treaties. It can be asked, of course, how long the EU will be able
to operate on the basis of its existing treaties and how effective such operations
might be. Kurpas and Schönlau, for instance, argue that the EU can continue
to operate on the basis of the Treaty of Nice for a while longer. That would be a
forced scenario, but if Member States cannot agree on how to move forward, the
EU will have to continue to work on the basis of existing treaties. If none of the
large EU Member States takes the leadership role in offering a widely accepted
way of moving forward, then changes in the current institutional structure
might occur only as the result of a serious political crisis – one which would force
heads of state to reach agreement on a common position.
The Common Foreign and Security Policy is sometimes cited as a reason why
ratification of the ECT should continue, because the treaty contains several key
innovations with respect to the CFSP. Some researchers have taken a closer
look at the further development of the CFSP even if the ECT is rejected, and
have concluded that this would not be too serious a blow against the policy.
Karen Smith has analysed the most important elements in terms of foreign
policy development in the ECT. Among them is the creation of an EU foreign
minister and the establishment of a European External Action Service. The EU
would become a subject of international law, and the treaty also contains an
article on solidarity.49 The EU’s Petersberg missions would be expanded to
include disarmament operations, military consultations and assistance among
Member States. There would be work on conflict prevention and post-conflict

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 58

58

TOMS ROSTOKS

activities. A Defence Agency would be established to enhance co-operation in
the field of defence. Smith argues that of all of these reforms, only the first three
are not being introduced already, adding that the foreign minister, the External
Action Service and the idea of the EU becoming a subject of international law –
these are not urgent and, especially in the case of the latter reform, particularly
important issues.50 This means that political will, not formal rules in a treaty, are
needed for enhanced co-operation in the field of foreign and security policy.
3. Dividing up the ECT into component parts51
This scenario speaks to the implementation of only those elements of the
Constitutional Treaty which would not require a referendum. The idea is supported by those countries which feel that the ECT is dead, but that changes must
nevertheless be made to existing EU treaties. Some fragments of the ECT must,
therefore, be ‘rescued’. Barysch argues that France is among the countries
which hold this view, noting that the current French president and the leading
candidates in the presidential election of 2007 all support the introduction of
just certain elements of the treaty. Barysch believes that European Commission
President Barroso also supports this approach.52
Kurpas and Schönlau have noted that this approach is attracting increasing
support not just among Member States, but also in various EU institutions. If
Barysch claims that Barroso defends the idea, then Kurpas and Schönlau believe
that there are also several members of the European Commission who do the
same. Javier Solana, the European Union’s high representative on matters of
foreign and security policy, might also support the introduction of those parts
of the treaty which would lead to institutional restructuring so as to enhance the
EU’s capabilities in the fields which he oversees. True, this approach is difficult
in that countries would certainly have problems in defining those elements of
the ECT which are the most important and should be introduced first. Neither
would it be easy to define those which could be implemented through the
existing legislative basis of the EU’s operations without organising new referenda.
4. Launching new negotiations and starting from scratch
Authors whose works were studied for the purpose of this paper almost
completely rejected the possibility that this might happen, because the proposal

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 59

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

59

to draft a completely new treaty has come from very diverse political actors
who would find it difficult to reach agreement in practice.53 Several major
problems would emerge if work began on a new treaty. It would certainly not
be a good idea to draft a new political document which is similar to the existing
one, because the result of national votes would probably not change. If a new
and different treaty were to be created, there would be disputes about the
institutional framework within which it would be assembled – an intergovernmental conference or a new convention? Experience with the ECT suggests
that Member States would not be thrilled about involving themselves in this
kind of project again, and they would not want to invest time and resources if
there were no certainty about the results. It is most likely that Member States at
this time are not prepared for a massive and very ambiguous project of this time.
5. Ratification of the first and (perhaps) second part of the ECT
This is a proposed compromise aimed at satisfying both those who want to
continue ratification of the existing text and those who want to implement just
certain parts of the Constitutional Treaty. This option, too, is not without some
serious problems. First of all, it would be hard to avoid referenda in quite a
few EU Member States, and political leaders would be displeased about the
possibility that even an abridged version of the ECT might be rejected once
again. Second, there could be legal problems. If only a few Member States were
to ratify one part of the ECT, there could be questions about the application of
various other sources of law. It is not known whether it is even possible to take
the first or first and second part of the ECT while ignoring the rest of the document. Neither is it clear how countries which have ratified the entire ECT would
form relations with countries which have ratified only a few parts thereof. It
must be noted that existing agreements would remain in force, at least in the
second group of countries as defined above. Kurpas and Schönlau argue that
this would be a very complicated scenario in legal terms, but it would not be
impossible.
6. A crisis which spells the end of the political union
This less concerns the ECT as such and more the way in which the crisis
affects the future of the EU as a political unit. Here the starting point is the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

60

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 60

TOMS ROSTOKS

same as when considering the scenario of ‘burying’ the ECT, but the consequences are quite different. The ‘burial’ scenario may sound pessimistic, but it
is in fact quite optimistic if compared to the possibility that the EU might fall
apart altogether. The point is this: since the French and Dutch referenda, the ECT
has been ‘dead’, but this is just the beginning, because the failure of the treaty
has a long-term influence on other aspects of the European project. As Charles
Grant has pointed out, rejection of the ECT means that treaty-based integration
is coming to an end. Deepening of integration could be halted for a long time
to come. Certain Member States could try to implement models of deeper integration, and the influence on overall EU integration would be deleterious, as
that would truly mean a Europe of two speeds. Without necessary institutional
restructuring, the EU may experience an institutional crisis in a few years’
time, one which leads to Member States rejecting the existing achievements of
integration. The EU would then become nothing more than a free market zone
with weak political institutions.54 This pessimistic view might not apply to ‘core
Europe’, but it would certainly apply to the EU as a whole.
Enlargement might be another victim of the failure of the ECT. If the deepening
of integration grinds to a halt, enlargement would also probably stop. Member
States have traditionally insisted that the deepening of integration must not
suffer damage as a result of enlargement. The next-to-last round of EU enlargement was, to a certain extent, the cause of the French and Dutch rejection of
the ECT, and so except for the admission of Bulgaria and Romania at the beginning of 2007, the EU, under this scenario, would halt all further enlargement
until the issue of deepening integration is resolved. Grant argues that deeper
integration is unlikely in the near future and that quite the opposite might
occur instead, and this means that enlargement would stop for an indeterminate
period of time.55 Indeed, the accession of Romania and Bulgaria remained
under the question mark until very late in the autumn of 2006. Negotiations
with Turkey could be launched only because some EU Member States believed
that the negotiations would never end. France has decided that it will hold a
referendum on the admission of any new Member States. It is quite possible that
Austria would insist on a referendum if membership were offered to Turkey.
Other EU Member States are also not too delighted about the possibility of
Turkey’s accession to the EU.
This is a scenario, of course, which goes far beyond the ratification of the
ECT as such, but it is necessary to think about this possibility even if it does

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 61

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

61

seem rather apocalyptic. In the scenario of ‘burying’ the ECT, the overall mood
remains optimistic, because the EU can, after all, continue to move forward on
the basis of its existing treaties, and it can achieve significant progress through
specific projects, thus restoring the faith of Europeans in EU integration. In this
scenario, however, ‘burying’ the ECT means disintegration and a damaging
influence on major EU projects such as further enlargement.
7. Attempts at more intensive integration
This scenario is based on the initiative of Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt, who has spoken of closer co-operation among the ‘core countries’ of the
EU. That does not mean that this is the only possible initiative, however. Verhofstadt’s ideas are just an example of how some countries may try to overcome
the crisis at hand by establishing closer co-operation. It is very important that
the ECT can serve as a foundation for such closer collaboration, but if we look
at which countries have ratified the treaty and which have not, we must find
that it is unlikely that the ECT will really serve as a cornerstone for closer links
among certain countries. First of all, the group of countries which have ratified
the treaty is far too diverse. Second, any attempt at more intensive integration
means co-operation which goes beyond the goals that were defined in the ECT.
Verhofstadt, in his ‘United States of Europe: A Manifesto for a New Europe’,
has not defined the way in which problems related to ECT ratification could or
should be resolved,56 but he does feel that the EU should now focus on several
goals. First, Europe must establish a common social and economic strategy
and administrative system for same. Second, there must be greater investments
in new technologies – an area in which the EU is far behind the United States
and Japan. Third, EU Member States must enhance co-operation on judicial and
internal affairs so that the EU can deal more effectively with organised crime.
Fourth, the EU must find one voice in foreign policy. A diplomatic service must
be established, and resources must be brought together in pursuit of common
foreign policy goals. Fifth, the EU must establish an army so that Europe becomes a powerful player in the defence arena. Essentially these proposals by
the Belgian prime minister go far beyond the brief of the ECT as such, and so
the question has less to do with ECT ratification but more with enhanced cooperation among some EU Member States. Verhofstadt has indicated that the
countries of the euro zone should form the core of this group.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 62

62

TOMS ROSTOKS

There has been intensive debate about the prime minister’s ideas. Scholars
and politicians agree that his intentions are good, but impossible to pursue in
practical terms. Verhofstadt’s proposals are his own, individual initiative, and
they have even been criticised by members of the Belgian Cabinet of Ministers
which he chairs. Critics point to problems in the creation of ‘core Europe’. EU
enlargement has demanded great effort, and new Member States would certainly object to any attempt to shunt them aside. Second, the five priorities that
have been defined by Verhofstadt have also attracted critics who say that they
may seem attractive at the level of declarations, but it is by no means clear how
the current situation could be resolved on the basis of the five priorities. Verhofstadt, say these critics, has chosen to ignore the differences of opinion among
EU Member States, as well as the many different issues which prevail among
those countries.57

Summary
The European Constitutional Treaty and the things which have happened
with it lead one to reflection and many conclusions, all of which cannot be
included in an article of this scope. Here are a few of the major conclusions:
First of all, the ECT is closely linked to the future of the EU. This is the fundamental assumption and conclusion in this paper. The link differs from one
reviewed scenario to another, but it is hard to imagine that the future of the EU
will not be affected if institutional reforms are not conducted. True, ratification
of the ECT in its current form or some other form would not mean that EU
Member States, whether together or separately, would be able to cope with the
problems that are upsetting to EU residents. Institutional solutions, of course,
are just one prerequisite for dealing with other challenges. They certainly do not
guarantee that all problems will be resolved.
Second, is it most unlikely that the current version of the ECT is ever going
to be ratified. Approval of a ‘mini-Constitution’’ is not out of the question, because no EU Member State is opposed to integration as such, and all Member
States admit that institutional restructuring will be necessary sooner or later –
even if the EU does not suffer from the fact that this has not happened yet.58
Ten Member States have not yet ratified the ECT, but approval of a modified
version of the treaty is not impossible.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 63

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

63

Third, the German presidency of the EU represents the best chance to reach
consensus on the ECT issue, but even Berlin’s active participation will not
guarantee success, because much depends on the countries which have not
ratified the treaty. If the view that the EU can continue to operate on the basis of
existing treaties takes the upper hand and that it has more important problems
to resolve, then institutional reforms may be postponed for a long time to come.
Finally, this may be the last time that ratification of an intergovernmental
agreement in the EU is conducted through a national referendum, at least in
some countries. One can understand the unwillingness of some countries to
move forward with ratification under the current circumstances, but agreement
was reached on the ECT, and all of the EU Member States did sign the treaty in
Rome in 2004. It is unlikely that intergovernmental agreements which have
been thrashed out in negotiations among 27 Member States will ever be subject
to the vagaries of national referenda in the future. If national votes are taken,
they will certainly be organised in a much different way – perhaps, for instance,
organising a referendum in all Member States simultaneously.

References and notes
1 The author would like to thank Jirki Hakapää and Matuú Korba for their help in writing

this paper, particularly in terms of assisting the author to learn positions taken by
Finland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia in the ratification of the ECT.
2 Mitrany, D.A. Working Peace System. Quadrangle Books, 1966., p. 32.
3 It was only in early May of that year that public opinion polls in France began to raise the
alarm, because the number of treaty supporters had dropped below 50% for the first time.
See Kurpas, S. Incerti, M., Schönlau, J. and J. De Clerck-Saachse (eds.). Update on the
Ratification Debates. What Prospects for the European Constitutional Treaty?, EPIN
Working Paper No. 13, 2005.
4 The ECT ratification process continued even after the French and Dutch referenda.
5 In Belgium, for instance, eight (!) institutions had to give their approval, including regional
and community-based parliaments. The procedure required nearly a year to complete.
For more detailed information about the ratification process and the related procedures,
see the EU Internet homepage at http://europa.eu.int/constitution/ratification_en.htm.
Last viewed 16 October 2006.
6 Kurpas, S. Incerti, M., Schönlau, J. and J. De Clerck-Saachse (eds.), op. cit. P. 1.
7 Denmark was counted among the countries which would probably ratify the treaty, but
both Denmark and, to a certain extent, Ireland have a history of repeated referendum
votes, and so they were listed as questionable. EPIN experts did not list Ireland and

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

64

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 64

TOMS ROSTOKS

Denmark among those countries in which the ECT would probably not be ratified or
where there might be unexpected difficulties with the process. Kurpas S., et al., op. cit.
8 It must be remembered here that in several countries such as Belgium, the ratification
process began before the French and Dutch vote and ended afterward. In that case the
country is listed among those which ratified the ECT before the two referenda. See
http://europa.eu.int/constitution/ratification_en.htm. Last viewed 16 October 2006.
9 At this writing, the president of Slovakia has not yet signed the law on ratification of the ECT.
10 The focus here is not just on political decisions as to ratification of the ECT, but also on
legal obstacles which would certainly arise if the leaders of a Member State in which
voters rejected the ECT in a referendum decided to ignore that fact.
11 The classification has been designed by this author. The evaluation is not based on quantitative indicators, representing instead the author’s subjective views. There are three criteria
for the classification – whether or not the state has ratified the ECT; whether or not it has
been active during the period of reflection; and whether or not it feels that the initiative
must come from other countries. Not addressed in this classification is the issue of whether
the relevant country supports the current version of the ECT or has made proposals on
significant changes to its text. More detailed information about the activities and initiatives
of each EU Member State and candidate country during the reflection period can be found,
e.g., in EU-25 Watch, No. 3, July 2006.
12 The issue of the ECT has not attracted much attention in Greece, where issues of national
policy are of greater importance. The crisis related to ECT ratification has not been the
focus of any attention on the part of the Greek government or public.
13 There were virtually no serious debates about the ECT or the future of the EU during the
period of reflection, because Slovenes were far more interested in their upcoming accession
to the euro zone. Slovenia will preside in the EU in the first half of 2008, and the ECT might
be one of its priority issues for it at that time.
14 Cyprus is one of the smallest EU Member States and knows that the future of the ECT
will be decided through negotiations among major powers. Cyprus has ratified the treaty,
and it has used the reflection period to offer more information to its residents about EUrelated issues.
15 The Maltese parliament unanimously ratified the ECT in July 2005, and there have been
no more discussions about the treaty or the future of the EU in this regard.
16 The ECT was ratified in Luxembourg through a national referendum, and immediately
afterward the issue of the EU future was shunted aside, because the government found
itself dealing with problems of a socio-economic nature.
17 Lithuania attached a great deal of importance to the period of reflection, which allowed it
to evaluate the kind of EU that Lithuanians want to see. Several events have been organised,
and government institutions have undertaken leadership of this process.
18 The period of reflection has been used in Hungary to launch a public debate about various
EU issues. The ECT itself is not the focus of attention among experts or the public at large,
because Hungary ratified the treaty long ago – at the end of 2004.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 65

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

65

19 An election was held in Italy in the spring of 2006, so the ECT was not the focus of particular

attention. Initially the Italian government insisted that the ratification process must
continue. A bit later, when several countries had cancelled planned referenda, the government
changed its views. Prime Minister Romano Prodi argues that the text of the treaty must
not be changed, but its rules cannot be introduced until the ECT has taken force. He adds
that this position could change only if, by the end of 2007, Member States have not
managed to find a solution to the problem with ECT ratification.
20 In Austria, the ECT has not been the focus of attention in the media nor among politicians
or scholars, but because Austria took over the presidency of the EU in the first half of 2006,
it had to devote a certain amount of attention to the future of the EU and the ECT. The
people of Austria, however, are sceptical about the EU as such, and they are particularly
critical about the issue of enlargement.
21 Slovakia feels that the initiative for resolving the crisis must come from France, the Netherlands, or one of the EU larger Member States. Parliamentary ratification in Slovakia has
been disputed, and the country’s president has not yet signed the treaty. There was a
parliamentary election in Slovakia in the summer of 2006, and the issue of the ECT was
pushed onto the back burner. The victorious parties have suggested that they intend to
defend Slovakia’s interests in the EU, and so they are more interested in the EU budget
and the issue of further enlargement than in the subject of institutional restructuring.
Despite the fact that the president has not signed the law on ratifying the ECT, both the
previous and the current prime minister have claimed that Slovakia has already ratified
the treaty.
22 Belgium supported ongoing ratification in 2006, but there were differences in opinion as
to whether ratification should continue on the basis of the existing text or whether new
intergovernmental negotiations should be held. Other views appeared in the public arena –
some people argued that there is a need for humbler goals. First, they said, specific
problems should be resolved so as to achieve concrete results, and only then should there
be further work on ratification of the ECT.
23 Germany supports ongoing ratification of the ECT. Chancellor Angela Merkel has announced several times that she supports the process, but she has made no specific proposals
as to how the crisis which has emerged in the ratification process might be resolved.
24 The Spanish government hopes that the treaty will be ratified in all Member States and
that it will take force. The period of reflection is seen in Spain as a time during which other
governments can move forward with the ratification process and convince their residents
of the need for further integration.
25 During the reflection period in Latvia, there have been discussions about the future of the
EU and about Latvia’s strategy as an EU member, but not about the ECT as such. The
Latvian government generally supports the treaty, but it has decided to wait for initiatives
from France, the Netherlands, Germany and other countries.
26 During the period of reflection, Estonia’s government first looked at whether ratification
of the document violated the terms of the Estonian Constitution and how the process

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

66

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 66

TOMS ROSTOKS

might affect the country’s legal system. Estonia has remained faithful to the current version
of the ECT, and it thus hopes to send a positive signal to other Member States.
27 Finland ratified the ECT at the end of 2006, when it was completing its presidency of the EU.
Calls to ratify the ECT were heard in Finland even before the presidency, and ratification
was supported by all of the country’s major political parties. A very critical position vis-à-vis
ratification, however, was presented by Finnish President Tarja Halonen, who said that
ratification of the ECT would not create a positive motivation for other Member States to
do the same. Because there was no serious opposition to ECT ratification in Finland, the
country decided to ratify the document and thus to transfer responsibility for the entire
issue to the next presiding country, Germany. During the Finnish presidency, the views of
Member States as to the future of the ECT were solicited, and that makes Germany’s
work a bit easier.
28 Ratification in Sweden would involve a parliamentary vote. During the reflection period,
Sweden has made no significant proposals on how to deal with the ECT crisis. What is
more, there have been no serious public debates in Sweden about the ECT and the future
of the EU.
29 The Dutch government has removed ratification of the ECT from the political agenda.
Steps have been taken to analyse public opinion, and the government feels that instead of
trying to rewrite the treaty so that it can be brought back to life, the focus must be on why
Dutch residents rejected the treaty in the first place.
30 Ratification of the ECT in Poland would require a referendum, but in June 2005 it was
decided to postpone the vote for an indefinite period of time. The majority of parties in
Parliament oppose the ECT. The governing parties have changed their views within the
last six months, but most of the political elite still do not support the current version of
the document. Public opinion is far more positive, but if preparations for a referendum
were begun, there could be various processes which lead to a shift in public opinion more
than just once or twice.
31 Portugal is one of the countries which decided after the Dutch and French referenda to
take a break in discussions about the treaty. Portugal believes that the crisis cannot be
resolved unilaterally, and so there should be a collective decision on continuing or not
continuing the ratification process. According to Lisbon, all Member States must come
together to reach agreement on a future strategy. Portugal generally supports the European Commission’s idea of a project-based Europe, but it also argues that a few successful
projects or policies will not, in and of themselves, renew public trust in the EU. It is important, according to Portuguese thinking, for European integration to be based on values
which are supported by the majority of the EU’s population.
32 The Czech Republic is one of the few new EU Member States in which there is serious
opposition to the ECT among the political elite. President Vaclav Klaus has openly opposed ratification. The coalition government which was in office until June 2006 argued
in favour of ratification, but political opposition and public opinion were sufficiently
powerful to ensure that parties refrained from seeking ratification. 2006 was an election

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 67

Debates about the Future of the European Constitutional Treaty..

67

year in the Czech Republic, and the ECT did not attract much attention. Czechs were far
more interested in socio-economic issues.
33 The ECT is considered to be dead in the UK, with no chance of bringing it back to life, but
there are signs that this destructive verdict is not completely unambiguous. During the
period of reflection, Britain has proposed no initiatives or proposals as to how the problem
of the ECT could be resolved.
34 Denmark is one of the few countries in which there have been serious attempts during
the period of reflection to inform local residents about EU issues and to receive their
views. The government has awarded financing of EUR 1.8 million for this purpose.
Denmark has proposed an idea as to how the ECT could be reformed, and it has made
proposals as to what should be done during the period of reflection. Copenhagen has
tried not only to inform the Danish people about EU issues, but also to hear their views.
35 The most important political parties in France all agree that new intergovernmental negotiations are needed to prepare a new treaty. Paris also argues that EU institutions will not
be able to operate much longer on the basis of existing treaties Views differ as to whether
a new referendum should be organised to ratify a new treaty, or whether a parliamentary
vote would be enough, but political leaders in France all agree that a new treaty should be
strictly institutional. France believes that the EU should concentrate on the implementation of specific projects, particularly ones in which success would be relatively easy to
achieve.
36 Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern feels that the ECT is the right choice, because it addresses issues which have not been addressed in previous treaties, thus helping the EU to
move further along in its development. During the period of reflection, Ireland has sought
to increase public interest in the ECT and in various aspects of the future of the ECT. The
government’s position vis-à-vis the treaty is positive, but temporising.
37 MEPs ask the European Council for clear proposal on constitutional process, 14 June
2006. See www.europarl.europa.eu. Last viewed 20 October 2006.
38 The essence of the plan is based on three concepts – dialogue, democracy, debate.
39 The Commission’s contribution to the period of reflection and beyond: Plan-D for Democracy, Dialogue and Debate. European Commission, 13 October 2005. See http://europa.
eu/constitution. Last viewed 20 October 2006.
40 Brussels to defend ‘core’ of EU Constitution in treaty talks, EUobserver, 19 October 2006.
See www.euobserver.com. Last viewed 20 October 2006.
41 The author is not suggesting that this chapter will offer an all-encompassing review of all
of the proposals that have been made about the future of the ECT, but he does believe that
the amplitude of proposed scenarios is extensive enough to cover most of the truly significant proposals on dealing with the EU’s constitutional crisis.
42 There were to be parliamentary elections in the Netherlands, too, but after the premature
fall of the Dutch government, an election was held earlier – in November 2006.
43 Duff, A. Parliament Leads the Way. The Financial Times, 6 February 2006.
44 23 June 2005. See www.number-10.gov.uk. Last viewed 20 October 2006.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 68

68

TOMS ROSTOKS

45 Wagner, M. The Constitution: Ratification Goes Ahead. Federal Trust, European Newsletter,

March/April 2006. P. 6.
46 Brussels European Council 15/16 June 2006. Presidency Conclusions. P. 16–17.
47 De Clerck-Sachsse, J.A. Europe of Projects Without a Plan? CEPS Commentary, June 2006,

www.ceps.be. Last viewed 20 October 2006.
48 In some countries, the governing atmosphere was still quite optimistic in the spring of

2005, but the vote in France and the Netherlands led to a collapse in popular support for
the ECT. This is true in Estonia and Denmark, for instance. See Vestergaard, A. M. Danes
Settle Down to ‘Serious Debate’ on the EU’s Crisis. Europe’s World, Spring 2006. P. 171. In
other countries, public moods are very favourable toward the EU as such, but the specific
treaty is not supported to the same degree – Poland is a good example of this. See: The
Future of the Treaty: Establishing a Constitution for Europe – a Strategy for Poland.
Institute for Public Affairs and Polish Institute of International Affairs, 2006.
49 The requirements of this article would come into play if any of the EU Member States
were to suffer a terrorist attack or a natural or man-made catastrophe.
50 Smith, K.F. Whither the CFSP After the Demise of the Constitution? Federal Trust, European
Newsletter, March/April 2006. P. 1–2.
51 Something which is usually described as ‘cherry-picking’ in the literature.
52 Barysch further believes that the conclusion of the period of reflection is not possible until
two groups of countries with diametrically opposing views find common ground, and no
decisions on the ECT will be realistic until this happens. For the same reason, argues
Barysch, implementation of just certain parts of the ECT is not possible. If countries which
have ratified the whole treaty accept this ‘cherry-picking’, that would mean admitting
that the treaty is ‘dead’. See Barysch, K. The Austrian EU Presidency and the Future of the
Constitutional Treaty. Centre for European Reform briefing note, 2006. P. 4–5.
53 One has been Polish Prime Minister Jarosùaw Kaczyñski.
54 Grant, C. Staring into the Abyss. E!Sharp, July–August 2005. P. 20–22.
55 Ibid.
56 The Belgian prime minister feels that the process of ratification should continue, but his
proposals also suggest that the treaty by no means creates the necessary conditions for
implementation of the five priorities which are defined. Instead, the ECT is seen as just a
step toward those priorities.
57 EU-25 Watch. No. 3, July 2006. P. 19.
58 It has been suggested at the European Commission that the costs of failing to ratify the
European Constitutional Treaty be calculated. See Brussels Consider Report on ‘Costs of
no Constitution’. EUobserver, 19 September 2006. www.euobserver.com. Last viewed
20 October 2006.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 69

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection:
How Many Hurdles Against the European Dream?
Introduction
The European dream is usually related to such concepts as integration,
cultural diversity, quality of life, balance between work and leisure, human
rights, and a stable world in which peace prevails.1 At the level of rhetoric, the
European Union is considered to be sui generis in this context, and it is believed
that it must pursue the aforementioned dream. Once pursuit of the dream moves
from theory to practice, however, news reports are full of information about
battles over the EU’s voting system, the number of votes on the European
Council, a reduction in the number of European Commissioners, the transfer
or preservation of competence in the defence and foreign affairs sector, and
alike. All of this suggests that the EU Member States which are supposedly
pursuing the European dream do not have a unified vision of the EU’s further
development, and they also lack any real desire to undertake joint responsibility
for the development of the EU in the interests of everybody, as opposed to the
interests of national agendas.
The Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe (TEC) was invested with
great expectations to the effect that it would be a document which would define
new frameworks of European co-operation and define goals for the EU. While
the Treaty was drafted, it attracted the attention of many researchers who were
discussing what the EU is and what it should be. From the moment that the
European Convention was summoned to write the TEC until the moment that
voters in France and the Netherlands turned it down, views were expressed
which, directly or indirectly, predicted its doom. This paper is not meant to
offer an all-encompassing presentation of that debate, but it will consider the
main aspects of the TEC on the basis of the fundamental principles of EU law.
These principles represent the common values of Europe in the legal sense of

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

70

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 70

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

the term, even if they have never been completely formulated. After analysis
of the TEC, the author will propose a few recommendations as to what Latvia
should do during the ongoing period of reflection about the Treaty.

1. The methodology for European constitutionalisation
1.1. The context for European constitutionalisation
The debate about the constitutionalisation of the European Union began at
least 40 years ago, when the European Court of Justice delivered two rulings
in which it defined the principle of supremacy of EU law and the principle of
direct effect. The Court also declared that the EU is an autonomous system of
laws. This means that the doctrine of constitutionalisation has existed for
several decades now in parallel to EU law as ‘integration law.’ This can largely
be seen as the development of constitutional principles as promoted by the
Court and scholars.
Current debates about the EU must be viewed in two overlapping contexts.
First there are debates about the importance of the State in the future and
about the need to view the State more thoroughly in the context of globalisation.
Power is no longer entirely in the hands of individual States today. All nations
are affected by international economic processes, global markets, transnational
corporations, international crime, and other related processes. All countries, in
other words, are dependent upon processes beyond their own control. The
second debate focuses on the future of the EU as such. It has been suggested
that the EU is the most appropriate integration model for European countries
at a time of globalisation, but it has also been admitted that the EU has not
completed its own establishment. The EU must find itself in the context of
global processes, and it must become a new type of international structure.
This is a debate which has to do with the search for European identity and
commonality so that the EU can stand up against various challenges. The
process can be defined both in positive and in negative terms: concepts such as
European welfare, European democracy and European governance on the one
hand, and the idea that Europe is not authoritarian, Europe is not impoverished
and Europe is not violent on the other.2
From the perspective of international law, the EU is nothing unique, and it does
not exist outside the framework of international law. The effective functioning

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 71

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

71

of the EU under conditions of closer integration, however, requires unprecedented
ideas to find answers in the two aforementioned areas of debate. That is because solutions must be defined for two major problems: (1) conceptually
separating the constitution3 from the state; (2) transforming the EU’s founding
treaties into a Constitution. Here it has to be said that it is difficult to identify
Europe’s common values by simply projecting national concepts onto the
context of the Union. Doctrine offers the viewpoint that analogy and transfer
are undesirable or even dangerous here, because the Union is not a State.4 The
EU is not based on unified sovereignty, and it is shaped simultaneously by
numerous actors. During the Cold War, rhetoric suggested that the basic
constitutional principles of the EU included promoting economic welfare,
avoiding war, and contrasting the EU against the communist territories to the
East and, possibly, even against the United States. This rhetoric is no longer valid.
An argument which opposes the doctrinal idea of the incompatibility of the
national in the transnational is that the EU is based on international law, where
general principles of law are based on the practice of nations in their mutual
relationships. The fundamental principles of the EU, therefore can have no
source other than principles which Member States have accepted on a collective
basis. Accepting one of the two approaches would require a fundamental decision on the EU as a subject, i.e., the extent to which we see it as linked with or
independent of its Member States, the way in which we view the competence
of these two entities with Kompetenz Kompetenz. The two approaches co-exist in
parallel at this time. The EU absorbs the principles of States, but it also creates
special content for those principles.
When countries join the EU, they transfer some of their sovereignty to the
Union. This refers to areas in which Member States can no longer approve independent regulations or take other steps without EU authorisation.5 The EU
then continues to develop co-operation with its Member States, and that is the
area in which constitutional regulations are needed. It can be argued that the
EU already has certain constitutional manifestations. Researchers of EU law
have used various methods to identify these. It is sometimes suggested that
the constitutional law of the EU is represented by all of its founding Treaties
and it seems that the authors of the European Constitutional Treaty have thought
along these lines. German scholars in particular, however, have encouraged
selection of those issues which really are constitutional or represent the set of
primary law, i.e., so called ‘Inbegriff des Primärrech.’ 6 These, then, must be

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

72

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 72

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

supported in the doctrine of principles, i.e., the most important legal norms in
the legal structure of Europe must be exposed in a systemic way.7 Principles
which are an important source of Western law define the key elements of the
legal order and serve as a ‘framework of orientation.’8 This means that principles
can be used to shape European identity and a common understanding of the
community. These are not principles of primary law, but they are fundamental
principles of the constitutional ranking. The entire EU is based upon these,
and this eliminates fragmentation of the system.
1.2. Fundamental constitutional principles of the EU
Article 6 of the Treaty of the European Union and Article 2 of the European
Constitutional Treaty both make reference to common principles and values of
Member States. Principles at the EU level operate at the level of common denominators, given the special nature of the EU. In this they differ from identical
principles in the Member States.
In the context of the EU, five major principles can be defined at this time:
The principle of integration ensures the dynamics of the European Community and is supranational by nature.9 There is doctrinal reason to defend
the view that the integration principle does not in and of itself mean that the
final goal is the vision of federalists about establishing a supranational state. The
essence of integration rests largely in the fact that there is a need for functional
loosening of nation states which, in the name of effectiveness, transfer some of
their functions to the EU.10 The supremacy or supranational principle is in
place when these functions are transferred, and the principle helps the EU to
increase its influence vis-à-vis decisions that are taken by national governments.
The supranational concept is replaced in treaties with the word ‘common’,
which refers to the interests of all Member States while avoiding any impression
that the aim of the EU is to destroy nations. In practice, this principle is implemented with the help of comitology and diplomacy. Comitology allows
national experts to oversee the work of the European Commission. Diplomacy,
in turn, is the dominant method in the work of the Committee of Permanent
Representatives and in that of the European Council of Ministers. It is only in
the sense of the TEC that supremacy means that decisions which are taken in
spite of a Member State’s objections become mandatory for that Member State
and are superior to the Member State’s own laws. This means that the principle

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 73

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

73

of integration at this time is moderate and dual, including elements of multilateral diplomacy and supranationality. What is more, the implementation of the
principle is limited by the principle of subsidiarity, which speaks to an evaluation
of effectiveness before an issue is handed over to the supervision of the EU.
The principle of freedom11 covers several specific freedoms which can be
described as ‘respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law.’ An individual’s freedom promotes an individualised understanding of
society and the law.12 At the EU level, individualisation is manifested through:
(1) the ability of individuals to make reference to the norms of EU law in a
national court proceedings (the principle of direct effect of derived acts); (2) ensuring fundamental rights; (3) awarding constitutional functions to private
rights, including the individual’s economic and contractual rights, which is
still the main cornerstone of EU operations.13 All in all, the EU offers greater
opportunities for manifestations of individual freedom than do individual
Member States.
Observing human rights is a precondition for any country which wishes to
become an EU Member State. If this requirement is violated, the country’s
participation in the EU can be limited.14 One problem for Europe relates to limits
on individual freedom at the level of individual countries in which the model
of the welfare state dominates. The principle of freedom is undergoing transformation at this time, because the EU is no longer a union just of ‘market citizens’ – it is a union of EU citizens, too. This means that the principle must be
strengthened outside of the economic framework. This is seen in the latest
secondary acts which are based on citizenship, not on economic activity. The
case-law of the ECJ must also be mentioned, because it grants EU rights on the
basis of citizenship. The ECJ, for instance, strengthens the principle of minimal
financial solidarity among Member States, one which speaks to the payment
of social benefits to citizens of other Member States, irrespective of whether
they have contributed to the relevant national budget in the form of taxes. The
pillar of Justice, Freedom and Security, too, has changed in terms of content –
it is now the competence of the EU, not exclusively of Member States.
The principle of the rule of law states that the culture of law has a central
role in European integration, because it ensures stability and the rule of law.
Because the EU was established on the basis of international law, effectiveness
related to the creation and application of norms, as well as to the implementation
and sanctions, is of particular importance. One can agree with the idea that the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

74

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 74

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

larger and freer the EU, the more it must be based on the law.15 The Treaty
makes this clear by awarding functions of constitutional review to the Court –
something that is by no means all that common in the practice of international
organisations.16 National courts are also of key importance in ensuring that
the principle of the rule of law is observed. The principle consists of such
concepts in EU law as direct applicability, homogeneous interpretation and
supremacy. Several problems have appeared in this regard, not least the lack
of legal controls in issues related to the second and third pillar. It is also true
that individuals have limited rights to dispute the Community’s legislation,
and Member State courts have been passive in terms of co-operation with the
European Court of Justice.
The principle of democracy – here it is crucial to differentiate between
political science and law, as well as to think about the essence of the principle
in States and in a supranational organisations. Democracy is usually considered
to be a political concept. There was a shift in thinking in the early 1990s, when
two aspects of the legal principles of democracy were first studied in relation
to the EU. One was based on civil rights and EU citizenship, while the other
focused on the institutional aspects of the EU’s organisational structure.17 The
treaties of the European Union create foundations for both directions of
research.18 The European Court of Human Rights, too, has declared that the
institutional structure of the EU has reached a level at which it can be evaluated
in terms of how it corresponds to the principle of democracy.19 The EU faces
challenges in his context. The foundation for the principle at the national level
is equality among citizens, but at the EU level, the principle must ensure that
the diversity of Member States is observed.20 One of the slogans of the EU,
‘United in Diversity’, is the cornerstone for the principle of democracy irrespective of whether it affects EU activities in the context of EU citizenship or
EU institutions.
The principle of solidarity is reflected in the Treaty of the European Community and in Article 2 of the Treaty of the European Union, which lists the
duties of the European Community and the EU – those which all Member
States agree to implement. There is also Article 10 of the ECT, which obliges
Member States to do everything that is necessary for them to comply with
their duties.21 Article 10 also bans any steps on the part of Member States that
would hinder or threaten the ability to achieve the goals of the Treaty. The
norm has also been described as the principle of loyalty, and this is a concept

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 75

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

75

which relates to the principle of solidarity. Although this latter principle is of
fundamental importance for the future of the EU, its implementation or even
recognition is a major problem. Disputes about the distribution of votes on the
Council, the future of EU financing and the vision of the EU as such – these
vividly illustrate difficulties with the principle of solidarity. The main problem
in this context is how to shape a constitutional process which mobilises
European public opinion in a new, legitimate and non-national nation which is
based on loyalty and solidarity vis-à-vis the EU.22
All of this shows that the principles of the EU are not static. That is because of
the dynamic and incremental nature of the project that is the European Union.
This means that the fundamental issue is whether the constitution and the process of constitutionalisation, in the statal sense, is appropriate to the EU at its
current stage of development. Constitutionalism as such is a conservative method
of political theory, because it is meant to strengthen the State as a permanent
subject of international law, defining the basic elements of its activities. The EU,
however, remains dynamic, and that requires responses to new needs and challenges with corresponding progress.23 It is necessary to consider, therefore, whether
this dynamic process of development really requires a legally finalised structure –
if it is even possible to achieve the creation of such a structure ever.24

2. Creating the Constitution
During 50 years of step-by-step integration, the European Union came to
resemble a patchwork blanket, one with many different initiatives which were
truly understood only by experts. A new approach was needed to deal with
various democratic challenges.25 The definition of a new approach began in
the Laeken Declaration, which ordered the European Convention to define
overall duties that would be included in the text of the treaties. This section
will take a critical look at the way in which the new treaty was prepared and
the results of that process from the perspective of time, place and form.
2.1. The Laeken challenges
The need to review the basic treaties of the European Union was based on
several circumstances. For one thing, future enlargement was creating questions
about the effective governance of the EU. Second, there was the heritage of the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 76

76

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

Amsterdam and Nice Treaties, with intergovernmental conferences proving to
be unable to simplify the basic treaties which, therefore, remained chaotic.26
Third, political debates about the process of enlargement renewed discussions
as to the future of Europe. European decision makers had no unanimity of
opinion on these matters, and that remains true today. Tony Blair argued that
the EU must be a ‘superpower, but not a super-state’, Jacques Chirac was
plumping for ‘a unified Europe of nations, not the United States of Europe’,
and Joschka Fischer supported the idea of a ‘European federation.’27 Guy
Verhofstadt, for his part, spoke of the United States of Europe.28 These are
important issues not just in the context of the EU, but also in relation to other
international organisations which have seen their role in international relations
increasing substantially since the end of the Second World War.29 One can ask
whether States, which as the main subjects of international law, are satisfied
with these developments. One might also wonder what they think about the
future of the role of international organisations.
The mandate for the European Convention was specified in the European
Council’s Laeken Declaration of 2001, and a number of problems were identified. The first was the need to bring EU institutions closer to the EU’s citizens
by improving the distribution of competences, simplifying EU legal acts, and
promoting democracy, transparency and effectiveness. Next there was the role
of Europe in a globalised world. The Convention was also asked to simplify
the EU’s basic treaties without amending their content to any particular
degree, to review the structure of pillars, and to decide on what to do with the
European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights30 and the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.31
We can conclude, therefore that the mandate issued by the Council to the
Convention was moderate. The main issue was still the functioning of the
internal market and the common currency. The Convention, however, developed a far more ambitious project. Its failure can be attributed to three factors –
a bad place, a bad time, and a bad form.
2.2. A bad place
The Convention which drafted the new Constitution had 105 full members
and 102 deputy members. The project was managed by a powerful Presidium
of 13 individuals and of limited membership. This is not a structure which is

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 77

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

77

envisaged in EU Treaties, and it was first used to draft the Charter on Fundamental Rights. Even then the model of the Convention was criticised as being
inappropriate for the drafting of legal documents. The Convention proposed a
democratic process for the development of new projects, but on the other
hand, the diverse membership of the Convention and the diverse interests of
its participants could not lead to the creation of a high-quality document and
achieve the necessary legal compromises in a short period of time. The EU had
been seeking an ideal model for itself ever since the amending of the Maastricht
Treaty – amendments and entirely new documents had been prepared. Attempts
to democratise the system created ever more critical problems.
Observers of how the Constitution was drafted say that from the spring of
2003, the Presidium of the Convention held a monopoly on the process.32 The
European Commission was minimally involved in the process. Amendments
were often hasty, and often they were written by a single person – the president
of the Convention. The preamble to the Constitution was an example of this.
The Laeken mandate, in short, was exceeded.33 The Convention was unable
to consider national political realities and public moods, perhaps because it
was so large or because the Presidium had such extensive ambitions. If Member
States are the source of the EU’s competence in pursuit of common goals, they
should have had oversight over the drafting of the Constitution. Instead, the
work of the Convention was dominated by narrow groups which surrounded
the Presidium, and this led to the emergence of spontaneous and contradictory
ideas as to the content of the new treaty. The idea that the Convention was a
democratic institution for preparing the relevant document, in short, is a myth.
That is proven by the inability or disinterest of the Convention in conducting a
serious review of existing Treaties, instead flirting with fundamental terms
without offering, at the end of the day, any thorough definition of any of them.
2.3. A bad time
It can also be argued that the timing of the process led to the failure of the
document – the Constitution was drafted immediately after the EU’s largest
round of enlargement. As noted above, the project that is the European Union
is an incremental project. Several initiatives in the past have failed because of
their timing. Examples include the European Defence Community initiative which
was presented by France in 1950, the plans for European Political Co-operation

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 78

78

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

in 1970, and the disagreement on implementing a qualified majority vote in place
of a unanimous vote in 1965, when France pursued its ‘empty chair’ policy
during the seven months before the Luxembourg agreement was concluded.
Since the beginning of the EU’s establishment in the shape of three Communities, fundamental changes occurred only when the Maastricht Treaty was
approved in 1992 and the EU established new pillars considerably extending its
activities. The move toward Maastricht began in 1986, when the Unified Europe
act was approved. Subsequent changes occurred very rapidly. Austria, Finland
and Sweden joined the EU in 1995, the Amsterdam Treaty was agreed in 1997,
the Nice Treaty followed in 2001, and 10 new Member States, most from Central
and Eastern Europe, were admitted in 2004. The Amsterdam and Nice treaties
were both disappointing in terms of the doctrinal hopes that had been invested
in them. The major enlargement of 2004 also showed that the EU was by no
means prepared for the admission of new Member States at the institutional
and psychological level in the old Member States. This was confirmed by public
opinion during the pre-accession period. Fully 68% of surveyed EU residents
agreed with the idea that the reunification of Europe was understandable in
historical and geographic terms, but the actual idea of reunification in 2002 was
supported only by 30% of the EU’s citizens.34 Moreover, 39% of respondents in
a 2003 survey said that the EU was not prepared for further enlargement.35 The
failure of the EU to prepare for enlargement was also demonstrated through
the fact that only three Member States did not impose transition periods on the
free movement of citizens from the new entrants – the UK, Ireland and Sweden.
There had to be very convincing arguments, in other words, as to why people
in the EU should support a new basic document with ambitious title for the
EU. Neither the Convention nor the EU’s Member State governments ever
provided such arguments.
2.4. A bad form
In international law, the title of a treaty is of no importance. There are
organisations which call their founding treaty a constitution – the World Health
Organisation is one example. In essence, however, these are international
treaties which do not grant the relevant organisation any special authority. The
European Constitutional Treaty is an international treaty of the same sort. Its
name is based on previous examples – the Treaty on Establishing the European

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 79

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

79

Communities and the Treaty on Establishing the European Union. Here we have
to ask whether the TEC differs in some sense from an international treaty.
A closer look at the TEC suggests that it is rather an international treaty
than a proper constitution. Valéry Giscard d’Estaing was the one who chose
the term ‘European Constitution’, as opposed to ‘Constitution of the European
Union’. He may have been embittered by the fact that his proposal to change
the name of the European Union to ‘United Europe’ did not win support.36 The
random selection of a name and the inappropriate content of the document
meant that the addressee of the plan was lost.37 The TEC brought together
both terms – ‘Constitution’ and ‘treaty’, and that typified the new project.
There were those who felt that this dualism represented an understanding of
political realities on the part of the Convention, while others felt that it represented the failure of both the Convention and the TEC.38
A documented constitution can speak to a great deal or not very much at
all. The TEC spoke to a great deal in that it documented an institutional break
in the process and defined a new normative approach which related to a constitutional aspect in creation for the political community to establish legitimacy.
A Constitution does not provide for much if it is seen as an event, not as a
process. The constitutional issue cannot guarantee that in the post-approval
phase it will cover all of the necessary involvement on the part of the public so
as to award the constitution its sufficient depth and breadth in the contextual
sense.39 This is certainly true when it comes to the TEC. In the context of form,
it must also be noted that if one can agree with the idea that the best constitution
is a short constitution,40 then the 300 pages of the TEC also represented a failure.
It can be concluded, in other words, that from the very beginning, the
Convention faced a complex situation. There had to be significant political
impulses to convince the citizens of the EU to approve the document. These
could have been found in the text of the Constitution if they had addressed
citizens or other external circumstances. Let us now turn to the specific
elements of the document’s content.

3. The content of the Constitution
The draft TEC consists of four parts – the main constitutional principles,
the fundamental rights, the existing treaties which define the competencies of

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 80

80

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

the EU, and the concluding terms of the treaty. From the perspective of this
analysis, the constitutional principles are reviewed on the basis of a methodology other than that of the TEC itself. Because the existing Treaty of the European Community was amended to a very minimal degree, that section will not
be analysed. Fundamental rights will be placed into the context of the methodologically selected principles, as will the concluding terms.
3.1. The principle of integration
If we review the TEC in the context of the principle of integration, we must
pose several questions. What are the values on the basis of which and among
whom integration occurs? How close is the integration that is anticipated? What
is the legal foundation for integration? What are the prospects for integration?
The TEC offers no answer to the question of why the peoples of Europe
should require such a document and this type of co-operation. If the job of the
Convention was to prepare a document for the future of Europe, then the
points of reference were very important to define goals and to prevent any
repeated errors. The Preamble of the TEC, in comparison to European history,
is very optimistic or even improper. It speaks to the cultural, religious and
humanist heritage of Europe, not that of the EU Member States, arguing that
this heritage is the origin of fundamental rights and freedoms, as well as
democracy. One wonders whether this is really a good way of describing the
colonialism which was pursued by several European countries or the wars
which have taken place in Europe for many centuries in the search for an ideal
balance of power. The next section of the Preamble, too, refers to the confusing
‘bitter experiences’ which preceded Europe’s reunification to continue along
the path of civilisation, progress and prosperity. That does not speak to a large
part of the new EU Member States, as they did not take part in that process
until the Cold War was over. The Preamble continues to be improper, because it
claims that Europe remains proud of its history. Surely most European countries
are not proud of all of the pages of their history – colonialism, collaboration
during the Second World War could serve as examples. These points of reference
are followed by the definition of the idea ‘United in diversity’ and confirmation
of the relationship continuity between existing EU Treaties and the TEC.
At the end of the Preamble, delegates thank the Convention for its work and
offer a Constitution on behalf of the ‘citizens and States of Europe.’ Similar text

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 81

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

81

is found in Article I-1. The reader may once again wonder about the real goals
of this project. If Europe is viewed in such a positive light, if the argument is
that Europeans must be proud, must recognise progress, prosperity, civilisation
and the like, then why does anything have to be changed on the basis of the
TEC? The goals of unification can relate to the need to deal with problems in
new frameworks, redistribution of prosperity among otherwise satisfied European countries.
Constitutions usually express the will of citizens, while the will of States is
usually expressed in international treaties. Clarity about this is provided in
Article I-1 of the TEC, which says that the Constitution ‘establishes the European
Union, on which the Member States confer competences to attain objectives
they have in common.’ Thus the TEC offers a vision of States which engage in
co-operation but are otherwise not linked to one another. This is something of
a marriage of convenience.41 The central role in this ‘marriage’ is played by
Member States, not by the will of the people. The second sentence in Article I-1
states that the duty of the European Union is to co-ordinate the policies by
which the Member States aim to achieve these objectives, and that it shall exercise
on a Community basis the competences they confer on it. This means that as
far as the TEC is concerned, the EU does not have any competencies in and of
itself – those are conferred to it. Article I-1, in other words, confirms that the
‘Constitution’ is not a constitution in the traditional sense of the word.
Constitutions signify authority in and of themselves stemming from people,
not indirectly, as is the case with this document via delegation from the
Member States.
Despite these criticisms, it also has to be said that the TEC makes a positive
contribution in terms of ensuring that the de facto existing legal personality of
the EU in the Treaty is confirmed de jure. This means a de jure end to a debate
which has swirled around legal personality of EC and EU for the past 10 years
and more – a problem which has made it complicated to apply EU law (ratification and application of mixed agreements, for instance).
EU integration has become more concrete thanks to a strict listing of spheres
of competence in the TEC. TEC provides for three types of competence – exclusive, shared and supporting (complementary) competence, with a detailed
list of areas of co-operation which fall under each of the types of competences.
In addition, there is also an indication of special co-operation in areas of
economic and employment-related issues, where EU Member States are obliged

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 82

82

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

to co-ordinate their policies with the EU. The EU is also entitled to undertake
the initiative in co-ordinating social policy. Particular competence is awarded
to the EU when it comes to the common foreign and security policy.42
New posts could also serve as an additional impulse for integration –
President of the European Council and Foreign Minister of the EU. Both posts
entail fundamentally important functions, but the implementation will very
much depend on the people who take the posts and on the vision of these
people vis-à-vis Europe.
The conclusion is that with a few exceptions, the principle of integration
has been moved towards intergovernmental co-operation, as opposed to cooperation among the citizens and the Union itself. Member States will be the
main players in implementing EU policies and in defining limits to those policies. It can be argued that the principle of integration would have become
more clear, but it would also have lost meaning if the new Constitution had
been approved.
3.2. The principle of freedom
In the context of the principle of freedom, the key issue is the discussion of
fundamental rights in the Treaty. These are emphasised as one of the main
values of the EU in Article I-2 of the TEC, but the fact is that regulation of these
rights in the Treaty is not at an acceptable level. First of all, Articles related to
EU citizenship have not been amended at all. There have been many doctrinal
proposals about how the status of EU citizenship should be strengthened. The
European Court of Justice has developed a significant body of case law in this
regard. Some of the proposals have perhaps been too radical for the contemporary political context. This can be said of the idea that EU citizenship should
be awarded to permanent residents of the Union who are citizens of other
countries or the proposal that parliamentary voting rights be awarded to all
EU citizens in any Member State in which they they are residing.43 At the same
time, however, the failure of the TEC to define EU citizenship as a fundamental status of the Member States citizens or to state the importance of citizens in
the EU sends a signal that at the level of Member States, the debate has stopped at the old concept of ‘market citizens’.
Secondly, the overall regulation of fundamental rights is clumsy. Article I-9 of
the TEC, which speaks to fundamental rights, does not offer any clear statement

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 83

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

83

as to the future of these rights in the EU. A Charter of Fundamental Rights was
implemented as a part of the TEC, but on the basis of insistence on the part of
Great Britain, the Treaty states that the EU shall ‘recognise’ rights, freedoms
and principles which are defined in the Charter. Here one might ask with good
reason why a special Article in the TEC is needed if the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a part thereof and what exactly it means to ‘recognise’ the
Charter. One interpretation is that the Charter is recognised only on the basis
of its content, but it has not been incorporated into EU law. From the point of
view of legal technique another question arises, i.e., whether the Charter should
not be reviewed. It was written as a declarative document, one that is not
legally binding, but now it has been incorporated into the treaty itself.
Because the Charter of Fundamental Rights was drafted as a document
which codifies those rights that are protected in the EU in one or another way,
the third part of Article I-9 is even more confusing. It basically repeats a
formulation from previous EU Treaties – that ‘fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms and as they result from the constitutional traditions
common to the Member States, shall constitute general principles of the Union’s
law.’ Here one must ask whether this means that the norms of the Charter of
Fundamental Rights are to be applied as a part of general principles of law, as
opposed to norms of a constitutional nature.
From the perspective of basic EU Treaties, the second part of Article I-9 is
also peculiar. It states that ‘the Union shall accede to the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.’ Why do
such political promises have to be part of a fundamental treaty? If the aim was
to ensure that this promise is kept, its presence in a long-term fundamental
treaty seems untraditional and unnecessary.
This means that the status quo remains in place insofar as the principle of
freedom is concerned. That will change only if the EU’s institutions become more
active in the context of this Article of the TEC and the Charter of Fundamental
Rights. This work has begun to a certain extent, because recent directives have
made reference to the Charter. The Fundamental Rights Agency has been
established, and in recent rulings, the European Court of Justice has made
reference to the Charter as a source of fundamental rights.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 84

84

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

3.3. The principle of the rule of law
There have been several obstacles against implementation of the principle
of the rule of law. These include legislative processes, the diversity of secondary legal
acts, and dilemma of supremacy and co-operation between the Community
and the courts of Member States. The TEC seeks to address all of these issues.
Legislative processes would be based on three major principles – conferral,
subsidiarity and proportionality. Also of importance would be the new Articles
of the Constitution in which spheres of competence are defined very precisely.44
The principle of conferral would be of the greatest importance in determining
the frameworks for EU competence. The principle means that the EU can act
freely only in those areas of competence which have been assigned to it in the
Treaty. Changes therein would require amendments to the Treaty. Concerns
have been expressed about the idea that if this principle is observed strictly,
that would hinder the use of implied powers, as defined in Article I-18 of the
TEC. Unanimous agreement among Member States would be needed before
those powers could be used, but it is not clear whether this decision would
expand EU competencies to other areas that are not defined in the Treaty. On
the one hand, this confirms how important the principle of the rule of law is
for the EU. On the other hand, it also makes the EU’s everyday work more
difficult, because unanimity in an enlarged European Union will not be all that
easy to achieve.
Unfortunately, the draft TEC has not amended the principle of subsidiarity.
The main problems in applying this principle in the EU remain in place. It is not
always a legal question as to whether a more effective result can be achieved if
Member States act separately or if the EU should work together. In addition to
the European Court of Justice which had to deal with this issue, the TEC envisages that national parliaments should be the main institution in making sure
that the principle is observed. This can be seen as a value-added to democratic
principle. However, it can also hinder the effectiveness of adoption of secondary
acts, what is of importance in strengthening the rule of law.
The inclusion of principle of primacy in the Treaty is questionable. The text
in English is not clear in that the word ‘primacy’ is used in place of the more
common concept of supremacy. Primacy, as defined in the TEC in Article I-6,
would apply in those areas of competence which are assigned to the Union in
the Constitution. The question here is who will supervise the application of

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 85

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

85

the principle: the European Court of Justice or the constitutional courts of the
various Member States.
The biggest innovation in the TEC also creates the greatest lack of clarity.
The TEC proposes an entirely new system of EU legal acts. One of the tasks for
the Convention was to simplify the existing structure, which is comparatively
complicated. There is no universal agreement as to whether the Convention
achieved this. The Constitution introduces new types of acts in some cases and
preserves the old ones in others. The draft TEC introduced European laws,
European framework laws, European regulations and European decisions and
other acts. The first two are comparable to the derived acts that are in force
today, but European regulations and European decisions would establish a
new set of legal acts which are non-legislative as they would not be issued by
legislative institutions. The legal nature of these acts would be different. The
Constitution also provides for additional derived acts, which are described as
‘implementing acts.’ These would be approved when the implementation of
legal acts requires uniform conditions. The TEC also speaks to special rules
vis-à-vis acts which relate to foreign, security and defence policy, as well as to
various aspects of freedom, security and justice. For instance, legislative acts
related to the Common Foreign and Security Policy would not be permitted.
It is hard to predict how much confusion this new system of legal acts
would create if it were approved, but in its present form, at least, it does create
a series of questions about the consequences of redefinition of the acts.
Finally, in the context of the principle of the rule of law a central institutional
role is performed by the European Court of Justice, which would also have to
deal with reforms. In addition to existing European Court of Justice and the
Court of First Instance, to be re-named as the High Court, the TEC also provides
for the establishment of special courts to deal with specific issues such as
industrial property. The fragmentation would be a good thing in that it would
speed up the court process, but there would have to be careful consideration
about ensuring continuity of case-law in homogeneous interpretation of EU law.
3.4. The principle of democracy
As noted before, the TEC did not review existing rules as to European Union
citizenship as such. Let us, therefore, look primarily at co-operation among
institutions and the decision-making, referring also to civic initiative, which is
addressed in the draft Constitution.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

86

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 86

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

The TEC contains several changes to the context of decision-making which
seek to improve and democratise the process. For instance, it expands the
range of issues in which decisions require a qualified majority, as opposed to
unanimity; the structure of pillars would be eliminated, and the co-decision
procedure would be applied to 43 new spheres which means greater involvement of the European Parliament in the legislative process. This would affect
the balance of power between the EU and its Member States in sensitive areas
such as criminal law, immigration, asylum, foreign policy, defence, intellectual
property and taxation. The reforms related to legislative procedures are commendable by some. One can praise the aforementioned procedure in applying
the principle of subsidiarity in the context of promoting democracy. In this
paper, it is not possible to analyse the new legislative and budgetary procedures
in detail, but it can be concluded that the TEC would significantly expand the
role of the European Parliament in the legislative process.
The TEC tries to make the work of institutions more effective in response to
the enlargement of the European Union. The greatest debates among Member
States related to the Council of Ministers and the process of qualified majority
voting. Article I-25 speaks to a complex procedure for calculation of the qualified majority, but this is not of decisive importance from the perspective of
Europe’s future, providing that a certain balance will be preserved. The debate
rather represented the efforts of Member States to maintain as much influence
as possible in a system in which decisions are no longer taken unanimously.
From the organisational perspective, the Council would be divided up into a
Foreign Affairs Council and a General Affairs Council. The suggestion by the
Convention that there also should be a Legislative Council did not win the
support of Member States. The final draft of the TEC did not contain the idea
which is welcome result.
Some Member States were particularly upset about the proposal to reduce
the number of European Commissioners so as only two-thirds of Member
States would have their own Commissioner. This innovation could be seen in
the context of democracy and integration, because a reduction in the number
of Commissioners would indicate a certain amount of maturity in European
integration. It would also make the process of decision making more efficient,
particularly because Commissioners are not allowed in any event to defend
the interests of their countries of origin. From the perspective of democracy,
reforms of the European Commission would not be a problem.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 87

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

87

Finally, one must speak of the citizen initiative, which provided that one
million citizens from a ‘significant’ number of Member States could demand
that the European Commission draft a secondary act. The TEC promises that
the specifics of this would be defined in a special EU law. This means that to
date it is not clear whether the Commission would be obliged to forward any
such proposal to other institutions and to what extent the other institutions
would find it easy to reject the proposals. Some reseachers have called this
utter populism, because the Commission would have to react to initiatives
proposed by less than one-third of 1% of the EU’s citizens.45 From the perspective of the principle of democracy, however, this is a commendable initiative,
because it speaks to direct democracy in the EU.
The Constitution clearly would improve harmony among the EU’s areas of
competence and the effectiveness of those areas. This is because it would expand majority voting into the areas of freedom, security and justice, providing
also for jurisdiction of the Court, and it would give the Union authority in the
context of the CFSP. The Constitution also has a section on democracy which
calls for greater openness and dialogue. It must be said, however, that the
draft Treaty does not offer EU citizens any substantial new rights to be part in
European processes. Therefore, EU did not take the chance to speak to the people
of Europe and particularly to the EU’s citizens – it was too busy debating the
distribution of votes on the European Council, and that has more to do with
the influence of Member States, not their citizens. This means that Europe did
not draw closer to its citizens, and Member States retained their status as strong
intermediaries between the two sides. Europe does not have its own society,
and the Constitution does not address this problem.46
3.5. The principle of solidarity
The principle of solidarity in the TEC can be judged from various perspectives.
First of all, the new Treaty represents an attempt to create the impression of
solidarity and unity by, for instance, eliminating the EU’s pillarisation,47 restructuring legal acts, reducing the number of European Commissioners, establishing
the posts of foreign minister and Council president. The way in which the TEC
was written in and of itself also demonstrated a certain level of unity in the EU.
Secondly, the principle of solidarity is enshrined in Article I-5, which speaks
to the ‘principle of sincere co-operation’ in relations between the EU and its

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

88

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 88

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

Member States. This is analogous to the principle of loyalty present in current
European Community Treaty – a principle which is assigned a significant role
by the European Court of Justice in its case-law. Article I-43, moreover, speaks
to solidarity among Member States in response to terrorist attacks.
Several other Articles of the Constitution, however, suggest that the principle of
solidarity must be reviewed from a more critical perspective. Article I-44, for
instance, speaks to enhanced co-operation in non-exclusive areas of competence,
making use of Union institutions to further the process of integration. In this,
the TEC would legitimate the principle of a ‘Europe of different speeds’. There
is reason to claim that this would have an effect on the principle of solidarity,
creating tensions between older and newer or richer and poorer Member States.
It might even promote disintegration and a lack of transparency in the EU.48
The principle of solidarity could also be weakened by the Article I-60 in the
Constitution which would allow Member States to withdraw from the EU on
voluntary basis. This could turn the EU into a hostage if a Member State were
to threaten withdrawal so as to oppose a decision that is unfavourable to it.49
This would afford greater legitimacy and finality to situations similar to one
when France practiced ‘empty chair’ policy of the 1960s. International practice
shows that organisations avoid such norms in their founding treaties so as to
ensure their survival from the very beginning and to send out signals about their
stability. The Charter of the United Nations does not provide the right to withdraw for Member States. However, the League of Nations did. The norm in the
TEC would signal that the European Union becomes less integrated. Critical
doctrine holds that this nominally constitutive document would in fact be used
to de-constitute the EU.50 There is good reason to make this claim, given that
international customary law allow States to withdraw from a treaty under certain circumstances, even if the treaty itself does not speak to such a possibility.
In summary, it can be concluded that the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference did not manage to sketch out a stable future for the EU
within framework of principles outlined. It may be that this was because of an
excessive focus on technical issues such as exact allocation of votes, and ‘checklist’ approach to other important issues such as fundamental rights. Another
problem may have been the conflict over general vision for Europe between those
who see Europe as a union of States and those who see it as a union of individuals.
At the same time, however, the TEC is a document which is convenient for
everyone. Euro-optimists can point to the awarding of the legal personality to

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 89

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

89

the EU or to the strengthening of the principle of supremacy in the Treaty.
Defenders of democracy can delight at the stronger role for the European
Parliament. Human rights activists will be pleased at the inclusion of the Charter
of Fundamental Rights in the TEC. Those who enjoy confidentiality can argue
that governance is not of prominent importance in the draft Constitution. Those
who are no fans of European integration can also point to the TEC, because it
does not speak to any closer integration or to any more federative approach.
Inevitably, one should ask whether Europe really needs this document. There
is no question that it is impossible at this time to create a utopian basic treaty
for unified Europe, but the question is whether the TEC offers something
substantively better than the previous treaties? It could be argued that the TEC
offers a good starting point for debate. Responsibility for the result must be
undertaken by those Member State governments and EU institutions which
insisted that it is wrong for the Intergovernmental Conference to continue to
debate about the text of the Treaty after it was approved by consensus at the
Convention.51 It is against the background of these results that one must look
at prospects for the future and at those issues and actions that are of key
importance to Latvia.

4. Key issues for Latvia
Debates about the TEC after its rejection in France and the Netherlands
began in June 2005, but the issue really returned to the agenda of the European
Council in the first half of 2007, when Germany took over the EU’s rotating
presidency. At the end of the Finnish presidency, in December 2006, a new
deadline for decisions was set – 2009, when European Parliament elections
will be held, a new European Commission will be formed, and Croatia will
perhaps be admitted to the EU. Until then, Germany is supposed to come up
with a plan of action, but that is a fairly complicated task. There are politicians
in Europe who claim that the EU is in crisis mode, while others say that there
is no reason to be nervous about what is happening.52 Similarly, proposals made
by EU Member States as to what should be done are quite diverse. France is
speaking of a strategic dead end, suggesting that a ‘mini-treaty’ be approved.
Finland ratified the existing version of the TEC in December 2006.53 Several other
Member States, as well as the European Commission, have called for limitations

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

90

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 90

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

on the reform process, arguing that it should be based only on institutional reforms. Experts, meanwhile, have been calling for political reforms, and they have
also spoken about the sustainability of the idea of a Europe of different speeds.
If we think about Latvia’s position in this context, it is clear that we must
first consider the positions that are being taken by other Member States. Any
process of consultations or negotiations, after all, requires a certain amount of
compromise. This does not, however, mean that we should not shape our own
vision as to the future of the European Union so that we can also develop
consistent positions vis-à-vis other issues. This is confirmed not just by the
positions taken by various political forces in Latvia with respect to the TEC,
but even by the fact that some political parties have changed their thinking
about the Treaty very quickly, indeed.54 The latest debate has been launched
by the Foreign Ministry, which has defined Latvia’s national strategy vis-à-vis
the EU.55 Formulation of a constructive position and debates about the future
would shape a qualitatively new phase in Latvia’s vision, because the European
Union has so far been observed mostly through the prism of funding which it
makes available.
As noted in this article, one of the main questions is whether Europe really
needs a Constitution at all. If the TEC should ensure stability and finality of
the process by answering all the constitutive questions which exist, then the
EU is not anywhere close to defining those answers, and any definition for the
sake of a definition would bring the natural evolution of the EU to a halt. The
EU is presently a set of diplomacy and certain democratic principles, and some
researchers have suggested that a new ‘European Enlightenment’ is needed
before it can decide in which direction to go.56 This is a premature idea at this
time, however, because individuals and Member States must first become
accustomed to the changes that have occurred in recent times, they must come
up with more precise understandings of the functional problems which exist
in an enlarged Europe.
The EU is often accused of a democratic deficit, and this complaint is made
by Member States both large and small, as well as by residents of the Union. This
is because the EU holds primacy in a whole range of areas – areas which used
to be the provenance of individual States. Indeed, the EU gains its legitimacy
from States, not individuals, and it is and remains dependent upon them. The
body of EU citizens does not really have any collective identity at this time,
and there is nothing which institutional reforms alone can do about this fact.57

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 91

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

91

An utter parliamentisation of the EU to make it similar to a State could be
problematic, too, because links with Member States would diminish. The EU
is needed both by States and individuals, however, because there are problems
which should be resolved outside the narrow confines of individual countries.
In this sense, the EU must be preserved as a supranational structure. Further
development must be based on its special nature as such a structure, and there
is no need to attempt copying national models instead.58 This means that one
scenario is preservation of the status quo, at least until a collective identity
emerges among EU citizens or integration achieves a new qualititative stage.
Of greater complexity is the question of shaping a common political culture
and identity through the use of democratic citizenship. First, the integration is
becoming more and more intensive, because some of the spheres of competence
of Member States can no longer be split apart as easily as was once the case.
Therefore, the EU has a natural need to expand its range of competences. This
promotes the more rapid amending of EU treaties and creates the question of
whether the EU could have avoided the developments which occurred after
the Maastricht Treaty. Second, external circumstances are facilitating this closer
integration – circumstances which are threatening the traditional model of
European welfare. National economies today are dependent on global processes, and the international economy is no longer based on bilateral or multilateral agreements among States.59 Third, the reaction of EU residents is quite
opposite, because at the national level, they encounter the unfavourable consequences of these processes, and they do not feel that the EU has made much
of a contribution toward resolving their problems. It is, at the same time, difficult
for the EU to deal with various problems if Member States only think about
their domestic agenda.
This Catch-22 situation can be escaped only if thinking changes fundamentally. Traditionally, State has been seen as the highest achievable structure for
people who are linked by solidarity.60 Symbiosis between the State and democracy emerged on the basis of sovereignty, but globalisation is threatening this
structure now. International law is becoming of ever greater importance as a
result of these processes. International law is becoming more ethical, and
organisations are becoming more autonomous. However, the basic units of
these processes – people – appear to be forgotten. States and organisations as
such are not capable of thought, only people do. That means that changes will
very much depend on the readiness of people to take a critical look at what is

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

92

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 92

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

happening and to change their thinking. The question is what exactly the EU
offers to individuals and what the State offers them.
The process of EU integration has not been constitutional, it has in most
senses been functional, and there is reason for this. A global or regional federation is highly unlikely, but there can be successful and close co-operation
among existing democracies. Of particular importance in this context are the
protection of fundamental rights and the rule of law, i.e., those principles upon
which the EU’s legal structure is based. In developing positions, therefore, the
Latvian government should consider to what extent the project, the decisions
of the EU and the position taken by Latvia are in line with these principles, the
extent to which they strengthen those principles.
From the legal perspective, it is of key importance that changes of public or
national significance be reflected adequately in the fundamental documents of
the State if residents are to accept those changes. Latvia has always argued
that accession to the EU launched an entirely new phase in the country’s life,
both in domestic and in foreign policy terms. The same was argued when
Latvia restored its de facto independence. Latvia confirmed the process by
acceding to various human rights documents and by enshrining these in the
Latvia’s Constitution. EU law, too, was drafted with the goal of ensuring better
lives for the people of Europe. Therefore, it would be commendable if these
significant changes were to be reflected in the Latvian Constitution, too, thus
consolidating society in pursuit of a common European identity and a democratic system of EU citizenship. The question is whether Latvia, in the sense of
politicians, of the public at large, and of individuals, has redefined the fundamental principles of the nation which were prepared in the 1920s, and whether
it is prepared to reflect these redefined principles in fundamental law, as has
been done in most European countries.61 Are the international processes in which
Latvia has been involved since the de facto restoration of its independence
reflected adequately in the Constitution? It could be argued that amending the
basic law and involving the citizenry in this process would help in contributing
toward an EU identity. The EU is to a large extent invisible for people. Approximately 20% of Europeans and fewer than 10% of Britons know the
number of Member States joined in the EU. In a 2006 survey, it was found that
10% of Europeans had a view that Poland was preparing to join the EU, and
9% still thought that Hungary was a candidate country.62 In Latvia, only 16%
of respondents in a 2004 survey thought that they were well informed about

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 93

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

93

the EU Constitution.63 These statistics make it clear that it is not only TEC but
also any amendments to it in the context of an enlarged Europe cannot be of
revolutionary importance unless the process is successfully presented to the
citizens on whose behalf the EU was created in the first place, the citizens in
whose interests the EU Constitution is being discussed.
There are already barriers which the EU must overcome in order to ensure
its ability to function in the future. Another important job is not to miss the
starter’s pistol and then sprint forward as a unified whole with good faith, as a
Union which clearly wants to achieve good result at the finish line.

References and notes
1 See Rifkin, J. The European Dream. How Europe’s Vision of the Future is Quietly Eclipsing the

American Dream. Polity Press (2004). For a summary, see Analîtiíis: amerikâòu sapnis ir
izsapòots, laiks eiropieðu sapnim [Analyst: American Dream is Over, Time for European
Dream]. BNS/Euroobserver, 17 February 2005.
2 Tassinari, F. Security and Integration in the EU Neighbourhood. The Case for Regionalism.
CEPS Working Document No. 226, July 2005, p. 2.
3 The term ‘constitution’ here refers not just to the document related to the TEC, but to the
fundamental document of the EU, as selected eventually by Member States.
4 Bogdandy, A.,von. Doctrine of Principles in European Integration: The New German
Scholarship. Jean Monnet Working Paper 9/03, Heidelberg, 2003, p. 12.
5 There are some specialists in the area of EU law which do not support this idea. They
argue that sovereignty is indivisible. The constitutional courts of several Member States
have handed down sceptical rulings about the limitation of sovereignty. The European
Court of Justice defined this principle in Case 6/64, Costa v ENEL (1964) ECR 585, and
Case 26/62 Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen (1963). ECR 1.
6 Ipsen, H.P. Europäisches Gemeinschaftsrecht. Mohr Tübingen ,1972, p. 4. See also Weiler, J. H.
European Neo-Constitutionalism: In Search of Foundations for the European Constitutional Order. Political Studies, 1996.
7 Bogdandy, A., von. “Doctrine…”, op. cit., p. 5.
8 Ibid, pp. 7–10.
9 Ipsen, H. Europäisches…, op. cit., pp. 66–68.
10 Kitzinger, U.W., quoted in Ibid, p. 982.
11 Bogdandy speaks to the concept of ‘equal liberty’.
12 Bogdandy, A., von. Doctrine…, op. cit., p. 16.
13 Ibid.
14 Articles 49 and 7.1 of the Treaty of the European Union.
15 Bogdandy, A., von. Doctrine…, op. cit., p. 20.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

94

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 94

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

16 Article 220 of the ECT would allow the European Court of Justice to overturn any deci-

sion taken by any EU institution in the context of the first pillar. The International Court
of the United Nations does not have any such rights – it cannot overturn the resolutions
of the UN Security Council or General Assembly.
17 Bogdandy, A.,von. Doctrine…, op. cit., p. 24.
18 See Article 1. 2, Article 6.1 and Article 6. 3 of the Treaty of the European Union and Article 189
of the ECT vis-à-vis Member States, as well as Article 17 of the ECT vis-à-vis EU citizens.
19 The court has ruled that the European Parliament is a part of ‘effective political democracy’,
and its supranational nature does not eliminate this description. Case Matthews v. The
United Kingdom. Application No. 24833/94, 18 February 1999, paragraphs 36–44.
20 Bogdandy, A. ,von. Doctrine…, op. cit., p. 32.
21 The Court has analysed this principle in Case C-230/81, Paragraph 37, Case C-358/85,
and Case C-51/86, France v. Parliament, Paragraph 34.
22 Walker, N. Comment on Antje Wiener, towards a Transnational Nomos. The Role of
Institutions in the Process of Constitutionalisation. Jean Monnet Working Paper 9/03.
Max Planc Institute for Comparative Public Law and International Law. Heidelberg,
2003, p. 12.
23 Ipsen, H. P. Europäisches…, op. cit, p. 984.
24 Focke, K. Europa-Politik nach Den Haag. Neubeginn in der europäiscen Integration?,
EKA 1970, p. 278, quoted in Ipsen, H. P. Europäisches…, op. cit., p. 988.
25 Lenaerts, K. and Gerard, D. The Structure of the Union According to the Constitution for
Europe: The Emperor is Getting Dressed. (2004) 29 ElRev, June 289–322, p. 290.
26 This situation has been assessed most precisely by Philip Allott, who has written the
following about the results of the Amsterdam summit: ‘The Amsterdam Treaty will mean
the co-existence of dozens of different legal and economic sub-systems over the next ten
years, a sort of nightmare resurrection of the Holy Roman empire.....’ See Shaw, J.
Constitutional Settlements and the Citizen After the Treaty of Amsterdam. Chapter for
Neunreihter, K. and Wiener, A. (eds.). Beyond Amsterdam: Institutional Dynamics and
Prospects for Democracy in the EU. 1998. See http://www.law.harvard.edu/Programs/
JeanMonnet/papers/98/98-2-07.htm.
27 Dunkerley, D., Hodgson, L., S. Konopacki, et. al. Changing Europe: Identities, Nations
and Citizens. London: Routledge, 2002, p. 4. See also www.politika.lv for a discussion of
the future of the EU.
28 Verhofstads, G. Eiropas Savienotâs Valstis.[United States of Europe] Rîga: Zvaigzne ABC,
2006.
29 For a more detailed review of the increased importance of international organisations and
problems related to same, see Klabbers, J. The Life and Times of the Law of International
Organisations. Nordic Journal of International Law, No. 70, 2001, pp. 287–317.
30 http://ue.eu.int/df/docs/en/charteEN.pdf.
31 The Latvian version of the Convention can be found at http://www.echr.coe.int/
Convention/webConvenLAT.pdf.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 95

The EU Constitutional Treaty Before Its Rejection..

95

32 Norman. P. The Accidental Constitution. The Story of the European Convention. Euro-

Comment, p. 322.
J. and Leino, P. Death by Constitution? The Draft Treaty Establishing a
Constitution for Europe. German Law Journal, Vol. 4, No. 12, 2003, p. 1293. For an opposing
view, see Kokott, J. and Rüth, A. The European Convention and its Draft Treaty
Establishing a Constitution for Europe: Appropriate Answers to the Laeken Questions?
Common Market Law Review, No. 40, 2003, pp. 1315–1345.
34 BNS, Reuters. Eiropieði vçlas tikai Norvçìijas un Ðveices uzòemðanu ES [Europeans Only
Want Admission of Norway, Switzerland to the EU]. 17 April 2002.
35 The European Commission published a Eurobarometer study on EU enlargement. Press
release of EC delegation. 17 April 2003.
36 A British member of the Convention, Peter Hain, said that United Europe sounds like a
football team. The Presidium also withdrew references to federalism after an onslaught of
criticism. See Norman. P. The Accidental…, op. cit., p. 75.
37 Klabbers, J. and Leino, P. Death by…, op. cit., p. 1295.
38 It was argued, for instance, that the Constitution’s form of a treaty did not affect its
constitutional nature as a basic law for the EU, as agreed by people directly or via their
governments. See Lenaerts, K. and Gerard, D. The Structure of the Union According to the
Constitution for Europe: The Emperor is Getting Dressed. 2004, 29 ElRev, June 289–322,
p. 298. See also Schwarze, J. The Convention’s Draft Treaty Establishing a Constitution
for Europe. Common Market Law Review, No. 40, 2003, pp. 1042–43.
39 Walker, N. Comment on…, op. cit., p. 12.
40 Wheare, K.C. Modern Constitutions, 2nd ed. London: Oxford University Press, 1966,
pp. 33–34. Quoted in Klabbers, J. and Leino, P. Death by…, op. cit., p. 1293.
41 Klabbers, J. and Leino, P. Death by…, op. cit., p. 1298.
42 For more on this, see the article by Ozoliòa, Lejiòð, Bungs and Pelnçns in this book.
43 Klabbers, J. and Leino, P. Death by…, op. cit., p. 1302.
44 The TEC, as noted, speaks to exclusive, shared, supporting and complementary competences. It also addresses the CFSP and the issue of co-operation in legal affairs (Articles
13–17).
45 Editorial Comment: A Constitution Whose Bottle is Definitely Half-Full and not HalfEmpty. European Law Review, No. 28, 2003, pp. 449–450.
46 Klabbers, J. and Leino, P. Death by…, op. cit., p. 1302.,
47 The special nature of the CFSP is of a political nature, it is not an organisational choice.
48 Lenaerts, K. and Gerard D. The Structure…, op. cit., p. 315.
49 Klabbers, J. and Leino, P . Death by…, op. cit., p. 1299.
50 Ibid., p. 1300.
51 Editorial Comments: The Failure to Reach Agreement on the EU Constitution – Hard
Questions. Common Market Law Review, Vol. 41, 2004, p. 1.
52 See European leaders are about to squander their second chance to get the constitution
right. The Economist, 6 January 2007. Also, Fit at 50? A special report on the European
33 Klabbers,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

96

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 96

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA

Union. The Economist, 17 March 2007. Also, Cohen, R. For a Europe remade, a celebration
in uncertainty. International Herald Tribune, 23 March 2007.
53 Finland ratifies EU Constitution. BBC News, 5 December 2006. See http://news.bbc.co.
uk/2/hi/europe/6210098.stm.
54 See, e.g., the article’ The Putsch of Federalists in Brussels’ written by Atis Slakteris of the
People’s Party in the newspaper Diena on October 27, 2003, when the party was in opposition. He argued that a referendum on the TEC would certainly be needed and that
Brussels was paving the way for a federal Europe to which Latvia had never agreed in
advance of joining the EU. On January 22, 2005, however, Artis Pabriks, a member of the
same political party who was then the country’s foreign minister, published the article
‘Unified in Diversity’ in Diena, and presented a radically different view. The foreign
minister said that Parliament would ratify the TEC and that this would certainly serve
Latvia’s national interests. What is more, the government promised to ratify the Constitution in just two parliamentary readings, as opposed to the usual three. See Lulle, A.
Sola zibenîgu ES konstitûcijas vçstîðanu [Promise lightning-quick review of EU Constitution], Neatkarîgâ Rîta Avîze, 14 December 2004. This shift in views occurred despite
the fact that the Intergovernmental Conference basically changed nothing in the text that
had been produced by the Convention.
55 It can be found at http://www.mfa.gov.lv/lv/eu/diskusija-par-ES. Last viewed 12 October 2006.
56 Allott, P. The Health of Nations: Society and Law Beyond the State. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002, pp. 284–285.
57 Grimm, D. Does Europe Need a Constitution? European Law Journal, Vol. 1, 1995, p. 297.
58 Ibid., p. 298.
59 Habermas, J. Beyond the Nation State? On Some Consequences of Economic Globalisation.
In: Eriksen, E.O. and Fossum, J. E. (eds.). Democracy in the European Union. Integration
Through Deliberation? Routledge, 2002, p. 31.
60 Bogdandy, A., von. Globalisation and Europe: How to Square Democracy, Globalisation
and International Law. The European Journal of International Law, Vol. 15, No. 5(2004),
p. 887.
61 Ziemele I. Atseviðíu Latvijas Republikas Satversmes grozîjumu nepiecieðamîbas pamatojums sakarâ ar Eiropas Savienîbas tiesîbu integrâciju Latvijas tiesîbu sistçmâ [The Need
for Certain Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Latvia Because of Integration of European Union Law into Latvian Law]. Likums un Tiesîbas, Vol. 6, No. 3(55),
March 2004, pp. 66–70. See also Ziemele, I. Eiropas Savienîba – pozitîvs izaicinâjums Satversmei [The European Union: A Positive Challenge for the Constitution] Likums un
Tiesîbas, Vol. 3, No. 3(19), March 2001, pp. 70–78.
62 Aptauja: Vairums eiropieðu nezina ES dalîbvalstu skaitu [(Survey: Most Europeans Do
Not Know Number of EU Member States]. LETA-AFP news agency. 11 October 2006.
63 Zema informçtîba par ES konstitûciju [Low Level of Information about EU Constitution].
Neatkarîgâ Rîta Avîze, 2 August 2004.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 97

IVETA REINHOLDE

Multi-Level Governance in the EU:
How Many Floors Will the Building Have?
Introduction
It was back in the 1980s that academics and practitioners discovered that
the amount of work which EU Member States had to do in relation to the
Union had increased dramatically. Governments learned something else that
was no less surprising – they no longer had exclusive control over their countries.
Governments suddenly woke up to find themselves in a unified system which
they were supposed to accept and within which they had to deal with other
players and participants. This unique system was called many different things –
most often it was known as multi-level governance.1 This poses several important
questions. First of all, this is a system of multi-related levels. Second, it is a
system which involves both the governance of the EU and the governments of
the Member States. Third, there is communication and all levels of governance
are committed to mutual co-operation.
The purpose of this article is to review the future of Europe through the
prism of multi-level governance, focusing particularly on the view from
Latvia. It is clear that multi-level governance as such exists, but it is not clear
how it is to be organised and implemented. The EU is at a crossroads in terms
of governance, and this article will consider the historical development of
multi-level governance, the various types of governance which exist, and the
relevant administrative values which prevail in Europe.

Defining and interpreting multi-level governance
Multi-level governance began to develop in the EU along with reforms in
structural policies in the late 1980s. Once Greece, Portugal and Spain joined
the EU, there were extensive debates about how best to offer assistance to the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

98

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 98

IVETA REINHOLDE

three countries so that they might more quickly reach the average EU level in
their economies. The European Commission proposed a system in which
Structural Fund finances would be administered via the national, regional and
local institutions of the three countries, with the European Commission taking
part as a supranational participant.2 This unique model of partnership in
administering the Structural Funds enabled several administrative levels to
work together – something that was unprecedented at the time. The regional
and local levels of administration had typically worked at the domestic level,
but this model meant that they would transcend their national borders.
In the 1990s, the concept of multi-level governance was, for the first time,
defined as the overall decision-making model in the European Union with a
great many participants. Multi-level governance, as a unique phenomenon, has
also been called in the another way – polycentric governance, multi-perspective
governance, fragmentation, consortium, etc.3 This diversity in terminology
indicates that no real agreement has been reached on the content of the term
both among academics and politicians alike. This means that Member States
can choose any of the aforementioned definitions and then fill it up with
specific content and understanding.
In 1993, Marks explained multi-level governance as ‘a system of continuous
negotiation among nested governments at several territorial tiers.’4 This marked
out one of the most important characteristics of multi-level governance – negotiations among the various administrative levels. Marks also assumed that
all levels were involved in a network of mutual co-operation, because the role
of the regional and the local level was on the rise in EU decision-making. This
was true despite the fact that the EU had traditionally been seen as an arena
for two major players in decision making processes – the supranational and
the national level. The increasing role of the regional and the local level indicates
that in the more distant future, there could be talk of a unified administrative
system in the EU, although that seems to be rather a utopian idea at this time.
Criticisms of multi-level governance are based on the fact that it overemphasises
the importance and role of the transnational level, thus swamping the other
levels.5 In effect, structural reforms in Europe had ambiguous results – co-operation
between the European Commission and the regional level ignored the national
level. The positive aspect was that regional interests were taken into account,
to be sure, but this was an unfavourable situation for the national level which,
to a certain extent, lost control over the regional level.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 99

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

99
Figure

A schematic depiction of multi-level governance
Levels of governance
EU level

Supranational

National
Member States

Multi-level
governance

Regional

Local

Theoretically, there are two opposing models for multi-level governance. In
one, it is assumed that power expands into a limited number of levels and
authorities. In the other, the assumption is that multi-level governance is based
on functionally specialised authority with shifting and overlapping duties.6
Table 1

Types of multi-level governance by G. Marks and L. Hoodges
Type I

Type II

Multi-task jurisdictions

Task-specific jurisdictions

Mutually exclusive jurisdictions
at any particular level

Overlapping jurisdictions at all levels

Limited number of jurisdictions

Unlimited number of jurisdictions

Jurisdictions organised in a limited
number of levels

No limit to the number of jurisdictional levels

Jurisdictions are intended to be
permanent

Jurisdictions are intended to be flexible

S o u r c e: Marks, G. and Hooghes, L. Types of Multi-Level Governance. European Integration
Online Papers, Vol. 5, No. 11, 2001, Table 1. http://eiop.or.at/2001-011a.htm

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

100

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 100

IVETA REINHOLDE

The first type of governance involves a limited number of players and a
limited number of administrative levels. The limited number of players poses
the question of the capacities and influence of same. If local governments, as
the lowest level in a multi-level system of governance, become involved in the
process, then they must be sufficiently large and powerful. Marks and Hooghes
have emphasised that in multi-level governance, each player must be large
enough to fulfil a diversity of duties.7 True, it is not clear how large a player
must be in numerical terms, but it is quite unlikely that a local government
with 1,000 residents will ever be an influential player. A limited number of
players with exclusive authority and power means that local governments
which are at a certain level are only responsible for their own administrative
territory. Therefore in this type of governance, the exclusive authority that is
granted to each player means that players do not interfere in each other’s areas
of competence. This type of governance has a limited number of levels, holding
on to the accustomed understanding of the local, regional, national and supranational level, as illustrated in Figure 1. Functions of any other administrative
level is immediately questioned. According to Marks and Hooghes, the first
type of governance represents existing understanding of governance in
Europe, where power and policy influence are divided up among various levels
of governance.8 Moreover, each level is more or less unchanging in its structure
and its functions, which means infrequent reforms and gradual division of
power.
The second type of governance is completely opposite to the first. In this
case there are many levels and many players, and their power is not linked to
a specific territory. Actors are not just the official levels of power – the national,
regional or local level. There are also local community organisations, nongovernmental organisations, volunteer and charitable organisations, and organisations of various sizes which offer public benefits. This diversity of actors
with different interests and abilities to influence policy shows that the second
type of governance is more similar to the model of governance which exists in
the United States, not the European Union. The point is that people do not
encounter the government or the public sector as such. Instead, they deal with
various organisations which serve the public need, each of which can take
decisions in its specific area.9 This type of governance tends to break down the
traditionally accepted hierarchies among levels, and so a local problem can
become a transnational problem in the blink of an eye.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 101

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

101

Marks and Hooghes argue that the EU is a place where the two types of
governance exist simultaneously. There are no policies which are purely
national, even though the development of multi-level governance in the EU
began with the first type of multi-level governance. Over the course of time it
absorbed certain elements of the second type of multi-level governance. In
practice, the first type is usually applied to the supranational, national and,
partly, the regional level, where the division of power is simple. The second type
of governance is more common at the regional and local level of governance,
where local governments co-operate actively with local inhabitants, public
organisations and interest groups in dealing with issues that are of a local
nature. The distribution of these two types of governance can also be reviewed
on a different basis – some operations in the EU are largely the competence of
a single level (i.e., the first type of governance), but there are somewhat independent EU agencies, and they, along with different systems of governance in
the three major policy pillars, more resemble the second type.10
Irrespective of the theoretical development of multi-level governance, several
critical aspects of a vertical and horizontal nature must be considered. When
multi-level governance is viewed from the vertical perspective, one of the main
problems is that policies introduced at various levels and elements of those
policies may be incompatible. When policies are introduced at each level, are
the overall goals of the policy taken into account, or are just the views of the
individual level considered? The horizontal perspective, for its part, is essential
in identifying forms of co-operation among institutions at one level but in different Member States. Finally, multi-level governance, at its very deepest foundations, speaks to co-operation among the public, private and non-governmental
sector. Thus, faultless multi-level governance, whether viewed from the vertical
or the horizontal perspective, must involve the private and the non-governmental sector, and this is a goal which should be pursued in the ongoing
development of governance.
To return to the origins of multi-level governance, we must consider links
between those origins and the increasing role of the regional level in governance processes. In evaluating its partnership and communications model in
the late 1980s, the European Commission did not anticipate the consequences
of its decisions. Regions were unable to communicate with the EC directly and
without the involvement of the national level, and this created a debate about
the division of power, as well as about communications between national and

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

102

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 102

IVETA REINHOLDE

regional levels. From the policy perspective, ongoing consultations are of
importance between the two levels if decisions mandatory for both sides are
being considered or these may be consultations between the two levels without specific results. We must also consider the extent to which the regional
level is represented in national parliaments and how much it participates in
the elaboration of national policy.11
The European Commission has an established principle of partnership
between itself and regional administrative institutions. This has allowed regions
to avoid the national level when the EC awards financing, and it also has institutionalised the representation of regions. The Committee of Regions has been
established, and regions can open up offices in Brussels. This means that the
regional level is involved in EU policy development – an area which used to
involve only the supranational and the national level. The Maastricht Treaty,
moreover, expanded the competence of the Committee of Regions to say that it
can provide consultations in all policy debates which could have an effect on
social and economic cohesion in Europe.12 In practice, the principle of partnership is seen very well in the European Commission’s INTERREG programme,
which seeks to promote trans-border and regional co-operation. The Committee of Regions conducted a study of local and regional participation in EU
policy development processes, and it quoted a German researcher who claimed
that at the moment of establishment, the European Union suffered from
‘federal blindness’, because it ignored the regional and the local level.13 The
partnership principle established by the European Commission has ‘healed’
Europe to a certain degree.
Bache and Flinders have written about changes at the supranational level,
arguing that multi-level governance must be viewed in the context of the integration process which resulted in the Unified Europe Act of 1987. It defined
the fundamental way in which the EU differs from other international organisations specifically from the perspective of governance. Qualified majority
voting was introduced in place of unanimous votes, which indicates that the
governance of the EU began to involve characteristics typical of domestic policy
making.14 These were strengthened even further in the European Constitutional
Treaty. This has changed perceptions as to what the EU really is. From the
perspective of multi-level governance, the EU must be seen as a more or less
unified system which works on the basis of unified rules and irrespective of
the geographic location of the various elements in the system.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 103

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

103

Each of the types of governance can be described with a different word –
‘unchanging’ in the case of the first, and ‘flexible’ in the case of the second. The
reason for this is that in the first type of governance, each level can have its
own executive authorities, as well as elected legislators. The process of changes
is more complicated and poses questions about the division of power among the
levels, as well as the institutional structure which ensures the implementation
of decisions. Changes in the first type of governance must be viewed along the
scale of ‘centralisation-decentralisation’. The second type of governance, with
its flexible approach toward the involvement of various players in policy determination and implementation, can create a situation in which changes lead
to the emergence of entirely new levels of governance.
At the end of the day, inhabitants are of importance in multi-level governance. Marks and Hooghes argue that the first type of governance, in which
levels of competence do not change, is much more closely linked to people,
who live in specific territories or may even identify themselves with a specific
local government, region or country.15 There is a lack of such identification in
the second type of governance. Moreover, such identification is possible if the
resident feels and sees that the relevant level of governance is dealing specifically with his or her problems. In that case, the individual feels more closely
linked to the local government, then to the state, and only then, finally, to the EU.
Even though the aforementioned types of multi-level governance are essentially theoretical, in practice sometimes the two are combined. We must
consider both the strengths of multi-level governance and the obstacles which
it creates against development. First of all, it means co-operation and co-ordination among all levels of governance. Second, multi-level governance must be
seen as a mechanism which has changed the policy development process of
the EU, not as one which has changed the authority of Member States or
affected their sovereignty. Third, the increasing abilities and capacities of the
regional level to communicate with the supranational level make it easier to
develop effective regional policies and to relate to regional problems before
they turn into national or supranational problems.
Obstacles against development created by multi-level governance have
broader political context. Member States are politically unable to reach agreement on the future of Europe, and that will affect the future of multi-level
governance, too. First of all, multi-level governance means greater alienation
between the system and the residents of the EU. The local level usually

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 104

104

IVETA REINHOLDE

communicates with people, but the system does not. That means that the question of ‘What is Brussels doing?’ will remain on the agenda for a long time to
come. This alienation can create threats against the legitimacy not only of multilevel governance, but also of the European project as such.
Second, even if the two types of governance have merged, the problem of
‘unchanging versus flexible’ will be a real test for the development of multilevel governance, because it will be hard to change accustomed, traditional
and strict distributions of functions among existing levels or to allow new
levels to emerge.
Third, in focusing on administrative issues, we must note that different
Member States have different understandings vis-à-vis the role and importance
of administration in national policy development, and that may be a serious
hindrance against the further development of multi-level governance.
Fourth, the regional level’s ability to communicate with the supranational
level is a positive thing, but the process of communications causes problems,
because of the dual situation it creates. On the one hand, the regional level
seeks to ensure that its interests are represented, but on the other hand, it does
so independent of the state of which it is part. As a result, the interests of a
region might be opposite to national interests.

Europe’s administrative values
Although governance is perceived as a system in which government institutions co-operate with the private and non-governmental sector, the foundation
for governance will always be national institutions of governance – the administrative structure of the state, which handles most duties and obligations
related to governance. The EU’s acquis contains no norms to regulate the work
of Member State administrations, but over the course of time common understanding has emerged as to how administrations should function. Defined
overall principles observed in all EU Member States have been introduced by
all Member State administrations, irrespective of the prevailing administrative
model in each country. The concept of a European Administrative Space (EAS)
is sometimes used when discussing the administrations of EU Member States.
The borders of the EAS are identical to those of the EU. The EAS consists of
principles which reflect Europe’s administrative traditions and values. In the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 105

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

105

context of multi-level governance, the EAS reflects the common administrative values which are held at all levels of governance. These make it possible
for the various levels to work together. The EAS must also be seen as more than
just a phenomenon of principles. It is also a factor which links institutions in
various Member States and promotes the confluence of different administrative
cultures. Interestingly, the concept of the EAS is based on a unified understanding of the European economic and social space, as well as of the space in
which there is juridical co-operation in implementing EU laws.16 Administrative
values, therefore, cannot be separated from other values which underpin Europe.
The EAS is essentially based on four major principles and numerous derived ones. The major principles are reliability, openness, accountability and
effectiveness,17 while the derived ones are trustworthiness, predictability, transparency, utility, technical and leadership competence, capacity of organisations,
and participation of the society.18
Reliability in the context of the EAS must be viewed through the prism of
administrative law. The work of administrations must be legally specific,
predictable and prospective. Administrations are based on the rule of law, and
the rule of law marks out the legal boundaries for their operations. Justice is
not just a political value. In the context of multi-level governance it is one of the
most important administrative values, because not only political power must
be predictable and prospective. The same applies to administrations which, in
most cases, implement political decisions and ensure the implementation of
normative acts. The principle of reliability and predictability also covers issues
such as the professionalism and political neutrality of administrations. Political neutrality is usually interpreted as a system in which employees of the
administration do not become involved in party politics. The concept is somewhat different, however, when we look at multi-level governance, which
involves co-operation and communications among the various levels and with
interest groups, the private sector and various associations. In that case, political neutrality must be linked to systems which make it possible to hear different
views. The predictability of administrations also refers to the question of commensurability when decisions are taken – the extent to which administrative
activities will limit individual rights and serve the interests of the public.19
Reliability refers to stable and predictable procedures. It has to be admitted
that when administrations insist on procedure, they are sometimes said to be
too bureaucratic. This concept refers to complicated and time-consuming

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

106

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 106

IVETA REINHOLDE

procedures, impolite attitudes vis-à-vis local residents, or even alienation
between the administration and the public at large. The fact is, however, that
predictable and specific procedures ensure precise application of the law without the consideration of outside interests. They also ensure objectivity and
respect for human beings – something which can be seen as an administrative
value in and of itself.20
Openness and transparency allow administrations to avoid corruption and
poor administrative activities, and also promote public involvement in the
taking of administrative decisions. The public is involved in administration
not just through the election of a parliament which takes political decisions on
behalf of the public, but also by overseeing administrative activities with the
help of ombudsman institutions and the courts. These help every resident to
understand the logic behind administrative processes.
Accountability has to do with the responsibilities of an administration before the law and before society. Anyone can petition the courts so as to appeal
an administrative decision, and this is an important counterweight to administrative power. Such oversight ensures that institutions do their work
within the framework of the law and in pursuit of specific goals. This is of key
importance in ensuring public and private interests alike.
Effectiveness is an administrative value which means that the administration
works within the framework of available resources while ensuring that all
goals are achieved.21 This is a difficult principle to measure, because the public
interest cannot always be served with minimal economic resources which, in
turn, might cause a significant conflict of values. People expect administrations
to be economically effective, but the European ‘welfare state’ model cannot
exist without a numerically large and extensive administration, one which
consumes a significant amount of resources. The clash of values in which the
administrative value of effectiveness comes up against the social value of
welfare is known as an ‘income crisis’, ‘fiscal crisis’, ‘crisis of an overloaded
state’, or ‘crisis of legitimacy.’22 The key fact is that the state can no longer handle
all of its public functions, and so more or less extensive reforms of governance
and administration are needed in Europe. What is more, Europe will finally be
forced to formulate its own administrative policy.
Even more, EU Member States all established their administrative systems
on the basis of ideas presented by the father of bureaucracy, Max Weber, about
the ‘ideal’ administration, and this is true despite the fact that different

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 107

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

107

Member States have different principles whereby they organise administration.
Weber defined an ‘ideal’ administration as one which is legally regulated, administratively regulated, formal, politically neutral and well educated. The
origins of a modern administrative system can be found in Prussia, where
administrators were known as ‘servants of the state’, which allowed them to
identify themselves with the state.23 Administrators in European Union Member
States today unambiguously identify themselves with their countries, but it is
hard to know with what the employees of the supranational level identify
themselves – their country of origin or the EU.
The development of multi-level governance has created new administrative
challenges. Administrations have to accept new values such as partnership
and communication, which have not been treated sufficiently seriously before
now. Communication will be important not only among the levels of governance, but also with players in the private sector, non-governmental organisations and the public at large.

The model of governance which has been officially proposed
by the European Union
The question of the EU’s legitimacy must be viewed in the context of the
EU administrative apparatus – one which the residents of all Member States
tend to see as excessively complicated and bureaucratic. The EU proposed
institutional reforms in an attempt to react to negative attitudes vis-à-vis ‘the
Brussels bureaucracy.’ In 2001, it published a White Paper, ‘European Governance’ which sketched out various aspects of governance reform in the EU, along
with principles of good governance. The European Commission defined reforms
of governance as a strategic goal back in 2000. The following principles were
selected by the EC as the most important ones in terms of good governance:
openness, participation, accountability, effectiveness and coherence.24 Interestingly, the principles cited in the White Paper are very similar to those in the
EAS, even though the EAS is more or less seen as an academic construct, as
opposed to an example of actual administrative practice. The principle of
openness states clearly that EU institutions must work openly, that they must
join together with Member State institutions in explaining the EU’s activities
to the public.25 The principle of participation is based on the assumption that

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

108

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 108

IVETA REINHOLDE

the public must take part in all phases of policy development. Interestingly,
the European Commission feels that the correct understanding of this principle
depends on the administrative structures of Member States – structures which
certainly must involve the public in shaping and implementing EU-level
policy.26 The principle of accountability speaks to the European Commission’s
belief that the competences and responsibilities of each institution must be
defined very clearly in EU policy development, and that applies both to
national and to EU institutions. The principle of effectiveness involves two
aspects – introduction of effective and timely policy, and making sure that this
is done at the right level of governance. The principle of coherence clearly says
that regional and local governments must be more closely involved in the development of EU policy.27 On the basis of these principles, one can sketch out an
ideal model of governance, one in which all institutions act in a way which the
public understands, a way that is effective in ensuring the participation of people
in designing policy and approving decisions. The result of this is that the activities of institutions at various levels are agreed and understandable.
The European Commission is planning several interrelated activities on the
basis of the aforementioned principles – redefining the roles and responsibilities
of institutions, attracting the experience and skills of regional and local actors
in implementing policy, and defining the rules whereby EU regulatory agencies
are established.28 There is a question, though – in defining these activities, has
the EU not once again covered up the true essence of administrative governance
with the blanket of ‘drawing closer to the public?’ The White Paper does not
define the model of governance which the EU is pursuing. Essentially this
means that the White Paper legitimates the existing and traditional multi-level
model of governance, with a limited number of levels of governance. The model
can be changed, but it is quite far from the ideal system that is addressed in the
White Paper.
Partnership, participation and the existence of formal and informal networks – this is more than just a tribute to modern values and understandings
about public participation in politics. Participation and communication among
many different players are values which will have everything to do with the
future of multi-level governance. In designing policy, the EU has always used
the so-called linear model for implementing policy. Decisions are taken, and
institutions must implement those decisions. If that fails, or if the implementation proves to be unsuccessful, the next step is usually to enhance the capacity

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 109

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

109

of the relevant institutions or to talk about a lack of political will in implementing decisions. The current situation seems favourable for introduction of
a non-linear or interactive model which involves many different players in the
formulation and implementation of decisions.29 This reduces the likelihood of
failures. In the context of the White Paper, the words ‘better involvement’ refer
not just to public information, but also to the introduction of activities that are
important if multi-level governance is truly to be developed further. In other
words, the European Commission promises to establish systematic dialogue
with the national and European associations of regional and local governments so as to engage in consultations on policy from the early stages of policy
development. The Committee of Regions, for its part, is to popularise best
practice at the local and regional level in terms of how to become involved in
the taking of EU-related decisions at the national level. Member States must
improve the involvement of the local and the regional level in EU policy development.30 This means that the EU may expect the emergence of a double
system of communications, one in which the European Commission can
communicate directly with the regional and the local level and the national
level can do the same. This approach would reduce the extent to which the
national level is ignored – the problem which occurred when the EC began to
engage in direct communications with the regions.
Which model of governance is proposed in the European Constitutional
Treaty (the European Constitution)? It speaks to a specific algorithm of multilevel governance – there are commonly defined goals, and the national level
(i.e., the Member States), transfer the responsibility for pursuing those goals to
the EU (the supranational level). The supranational level undertakes the role
of co-ordination among Member States so that they, too, seek to pursue the
defined goals. The relationship between the supranational and the national
level must be viewed through the prism of authority – the things which each
level is permitted to do independently, as well as those areas in which the two
levels are interrelated. The European Constitution divides all authority into
three types – exclusive, shared and supporting authority. Exclusive authority
rests with the supranational level, shared authority is divided up between the
two levels, and supporting authority means that the supranational level offers
necessary support to the national level. According to the European Constitution,
exclusive authority would apply to the customs union, competition, monetary
policy in those Member States which use the euro, preservation of the biological

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

110

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 110

IVETA REINHOLDE

resources of the sea, and common trade policy. Shared authority would refer
to the internal market, economic, social and territorial cohesion, agriculture,
fishing (except preservation of the biological resources of the sea), the environment, protection of consumer rights, transport, energy supplies, European
communications networks, the space of freedom, security and the rule of law,
social policy, and protection of public health, as referred to Part III of the European Constitution.31 Supporting authority applies to health care, industry,
culture, tourism, education, youth, sports, civil defence and administrative cooperation.32
This distribution of authority points to two important trends. First of all,
there are few areas in which the supranational level does not intervene at all.
Second, the areas in which there is supporting authority are weaker, to a
certain extent, than those in which there is exclusive authority. Administrative
co-operation, for instance, is a supporting authority which cannot be ignored
in the context of the European Constitution. The classical principle of the EU is
not to intervene in the administrative affairs of Member States, and that is seen
here, as well. The EU’s acquis says nothing about administrative operations,
and this is an area of supporting authority, but the ability of the EU to achieve
its goals does depend on how well each level of governance and all of the
levels of governance together do their work. It must be concluded that the EU
has its head in the sand to some extent in this regard – it spitefully refuses to
recognise the fact that relations between the national and the supranational
level have long since passed the place where only support and co-ordination
are in place, that the division of authority and competence that is enshrined in
the European Constitution could just as well be applied to any other country
and could be found in any other country’s constitution. When it comes to implementing EU law, the EU promises to support exchanges of civil servants
and training programmes that would help to ensure the confluence of administrative structures in the various Member States. This also shows that the
hiding of the EU’s head in the sand hides an interest in influencing the way in
which Member State administrations do their work.
When it comes to the governance principles that are enshrined in the European Constitution, the distribution of competence and the strengthening of the
principle of subsidiarity in the text are of importance. The supranational level
is given authority which is based on the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality. In other words, the supranational level promises to carry out functions

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 111

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

111

which other levels of governance cannot handle for one reason or another or
which would not achieve defined goals if they were handled by other levels.
Undoubtedly, the European Constitution presents an entirely new interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity, because it offers greater opportunities for
the regional and the local level to participate in the shaping of EU policy. On
the one hand, this recognises the national identity and the political and constitutional structure of Member States (a structure which includes local governments), but on the other hand the Member States (i.e., the national level) are
still responsible for doing the things that are necessary in order to ensure that
defined goals are achieved. From this perspective, the European Constitution
recognises the regional and local level of governance, but it shies away from
clearly defining the relationship among the supranational, regional and local
level.

Latvia’s interests in multi-level governance
Latvia’s position vis-à-vis its administrative system was simple before the
country joined the EU. The goal of joining the EU defined the things which the
government did in the area of administrative reforms. The government of
Prime Minister Guntars Krasts (August 1997 – November 1998) was the first to
recognise the influence of European integration on administrative reforms
that had until then been considered to be an exclusively domestic issue. Administrative reforms were linked to successes in foreign policy, and they
became one of the reasons for foreign policy success insofar as integration into
the EU was concerned. The Krasts government declared that Latvia’s institutions must make active use of ‘the advantages and opportunities which Latvia
receives as an associated state of the European Union.’33 The government
stated clearly that only by enhancing administrative capacity could it make
sure that norms would be approximated and laws would be implemented.34
This makes it clear that the government understood the extent to which the
administrative apparatus could stand in the way of achieving the goal of EU
membership.
In July 1997, the European Commission released its ‘AGENDA 2000’ report,
and it was very frank about administrative problems in Latvia which would
make it difficult for Latvia to introduce the acquis. This could have led to

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

112

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 112

IVETA REINHOLDE

domestic policy discussions about implementation of the acquis and the model
of governance that would be needed in order to represent Latvia’s interests in
the EU. There was no such debate, however, neither then nor in subsequent
years. Latvia resembled a hard-working schoolchild, doing its pre-accession
homework and improving its administrative system only to the extent that the
EU instructed it to do so.
During the accession process, the European Commission spoke to the principles of the EAS – professionalism, objectivity, openness, transparency, accountability, utility and effectiveness – in its annual reports on Latvia’s readiness for
EU membership. Any EU concerns about Latvia’s administrative capacity had
to be reviewed in the context of Latvia’s administrative ability to absorb the
acquis, because delays in administrative reforms made that more difficult.35
Even at the moment of accession Latvia still had not defined the desirable administrative system, to say nothing about any views as to multi-level governance
in Europe. Latvia joined the EU in May 2004, and the situation basically has
not changed since then, not even in the context of the ‘Latvia in the European
Union’ strategy,36 and not even when the Foreign Ministry began consultations
with its social partners.
It is worth asking which aspects of multi-level governance are important to
Latvia. We must first talk about the country’s ability to define its interests and
then to move forward at all levels of governance in relation to those interests.
Second, we must review the aspect of decentralisation, where relationships
and distribution of functions between the national level and local governments are among the most important issues of all. Third, we must focus on the
mechanism of communications between the central government and local
governments.
The most important issue – that of administrative capacity – has been on
the agenda in Latvia since the early 1990s, but the emphases have changed
over the course of time. Capacity in dealing with issues of domestic policy was
needed at the beginning of the 1990s, but by the end of the decade, administrative capacity was a prerequisite for achieving foreign policy goals. Although
the issue of administrative capacity has been addressed in many different
documents, no improvements were achieved for a long time due to the absence
of clearly defined criteria which would help in determining whether the
capacity was sufficient. One or two criteria should be identified to ascertain
that there is enough capacity to define interests.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 113

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

113

The second issue – decentralisation – is very important for Latvia. The
‘Latvia in the European Union’ strategy has stressed the principle of subsidiarity,
which means that decisions must be taken at the lowest feasible level of governance. No matter which type of multi-level governance is implemented, Latvia
must think about the capacity of the local level of governance. An urgent
necessity is to complete administrative territorial reforms, which have been on
the agenda for many years but have not been completed to this very day. In the
context of the future of Europe, administrative territorial reform is not just an
issue of merging parishes into larger amalgamated territories. It has to do with
the capacity of the local level to take part in a multi-level mechanism of governance. It was once said that the EU suffered from ‘federal blindness’, and in that
case Latvia suffers from ‘regional blindness’ – it simply cannot deal with the
issue of regional reforms without any rational explanation for this failure.
The Latvian Association of Local Self-Governments (LPS) believes that there
must be greater decentralisation of power and that local governments must be
entrusted with greater responsibility for the taking of decisions. This would
allow the central level to devote greater resources to the representation of
Latvia’s interests.37 The LPS also believes that development of the national level
is very important in this regard. Latvia must take advantage of the opportunities
that are afforded by the EU in terms of funding for regional development.38
Interestingly, when the LPS and the Foreign Ministry discussed this issue,
there was neither talk about administrative territorial or regional reform, nor
about the capacity of local governments to handle decentralised power. Multilevel governance involves communications between regional and local governments, as well as with the supranational level, which means that the capacity
of the local and regional governance system is very important in terms of the
quality of those communications.
The third, a very important issue for Latvia is communication between the
local and regional level on the one hand and with the supranational level on
the other. The LPS opened an office in Brussels in November 2005, and its goal
is to ensure that the interests of Latvia’s local governments are observed in the
EU’s decision making process. This confirms the existence of the aforementioned type of communications. The city of Rîga and the Rîga Developmental
District Council opened their Brussels office even earlier, in 2004. This is a classic example of multi-level governance with direct communication between the
supranational level and the local level and without the involvement of the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

114

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 114

IVETA REINHOLDE

national level. This raises the question of whether there has been sufficient
communication between the national and local level to formulate national
interests. When it comes to consultations and agreement on national positions
with the LPS as the local government representative of Latvia’s interests in the
EU, the process must be organised by the institution which handles the agenda
of the relevant EU institution.39 This means that the national level communicates with the local level on how Latvia’s interests are to be represented. It is hard
to say how successful this communications process is. Latvia has typically
done poorly in co-operating with other participants in multi-level governance.
National and local institutions seldom work with local community organisations,
non-governmental organisations, or the private sector.
The key aspects of multi-level governance in Latvia can be reviewed from
the perspective of each level’s strengths and weaknesses. At the national level,
the strength is the ability to co-operate and communicate with the supranational
level. These skills have been developed ever since Latvia first indicated its
desire to join the EU. The strength is also the system whereby official national
positions are designed – it has been implemented, and it can be improved if
necessary. Labour shortages have affected the administrative structure, and so
there is a theoretical need to enhance capacity at the national level. Knowledge
and skills must be improved not just at the central level, but also at other
levels, as well as among NGO activists who work on EU issues. It is quite difficult today to differentiate between those issues which are related to the EU
and those which are not. One can always ask about the level to which administrative capacity has to be raised, and when that capacity will be sufficient.
At the regional level, Latvia basically has no strengths, because it really
does not have a regional level in the first place. Latvia is divided up into 33
regional local government territories – 26 districts and seven major cities. One
can equally claim that the country’s five planning regions are what should be
considered to be the regional level. There are also ‘five statistical regions’ with
borders that are different than those of the planning region.40 No matter what
the regions are called, however, it cannot be said that they are really the regional level of multi-level governance. The local level of governance is fragmentary in Latvia, and individual local governments cannot be serious players,
both because they are usually too small and because they lack the necessary
skills.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 115

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

115
Table 2

The strengths and weaknesses of Latvia’s governance levels
Strengths
National

Ability to communicate with
the transnational level

Weaknesses
Further strengthening of
capacity is still needed

Existence of a formal system
to draft national positions
Regional

Role, structure of regions not
defined
Basically no regional level as
such

Local

Direct access to local residents,
private sector, NGOs

Fragmentation
Poor skills in communicating
with transnational level

Given all of this, the ‘Latvia in the European Union’ strategy should offer a
view as to how governance can develop further. The view of governance that
is presently in the strategy is very similar to that which was identified in the
EU’s White Paper on European governance and in the European Constitution.
Latvia is not trying to come up with its own views about the development of
local governance, it is merely expressing its support for the processes which
are underway. Latvia agrees that there must be new common policies which will
strengthen the EU. Each policy of this type moves the EU closer to becoming a
state. The second important element in the strategy is that Latvia accepts the
generally known idea that the EU’s decision making mechanism is not effective
and requires further reform. As Foreign Minister Artis Pabriks has put it, ‘Talk
of European bureaucracy is not just political folklore. The development of the
EU has actually been hindered by the EU’s complicated structure and the
sometimes unclear distribution of responsibility among various levels of administrative and political decision making and the relevant institutions.’41 The
strategy and the minister’s statement both make it very clear that Latvia is
concerned about the administrative work of the EU, but the fact is that Latvia’s

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

116

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 116

IVETA REINHOLDE

administrative system is a part of that apparatus. Accordingly, if the claim is
made that ‘it is in Latvia’s interests to reduce administrative obstacles in the
EU,’42 then thought must also be given to the elimination of obstacles in
Latvia’s own administrative system.
Latvia expressed automatic support for the model enshrined in the European Constitution by ratifying the treaty. That means accepting the principle
of subsidiarity, as well as the model of governance that is proposed in the
Constitution. It requires more active consultations with the public, but given
that the target audience for the strategy is made up of the Latvian population,
a clearly positive fact is that the strategy emphasises regional development
and admits to the need to complete administrative territorial reforms. This
does not mean that the reforms really will be completed, however, because the
issue has been addressed in a great many strategic documents in the past.
Multi-level governance can be described as a partnership among various
players. Latvia’s interests will be served by a flexible approach in shaping
partnerships with local governments in other countries and with the private
sector, depending on the issue at hand. Partnership means being active and
flexible, it means demonstrating initiative and defending one’s priorities actively. Partnership is also important within the state, and a fundamental aspect
here is consultations with non-governmental organisations as to what Latvia’s
interests really are. Finally, partnership involves a discussion with the public,
because Latvia will effectively implement multi-level governance only if the
public truly believes that administrators and politicians represent and shape
Latvia’s interests in the EU.

Scenarios for developing multi-level governance
Several scenarios as to the further development of multi-level governance
can be proposed, given the existing problems and future challenges related to
same.
The first scenario is simple – the existing distribution of competence and
power among levels of governance is preserved. Over the next three to five
years, indeed, this is a very likely possibility, both because of the failure of the
European Constitution and the fact that reforms in the EU institutions of
governance are proceeding very slowly. It is also true that the EU has always

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 117

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

117

emphasised policies and their content, not the institutions which implement
the policies at various levels. This status quo scenario will remain realistic until
political agreement is reached on what to do with the European Constitution.
Once such agreement is achieved, the focus will turn to the next difficult issue –
the system of governance and how it should be organised. Because the EU
does not have any right to intervene in the administrative functions of Member
States, the matter of multi-level governance may not appear on the agenda
even if a decision is taken on the European Constitution. That would mean
that the multi-level governance system would develop as it has done until
now – reacting to existing practice and to challenges created by political change.
This scenario would be advantageous to Latvia in that the status quo would
allow the government to ignore domestic administrative problems such as
regional and administrative territorial reform, as well as the involvement of
the local community in policy development. If those problems are not addressed, however, Latvia will find it more difficult to formulate and represent
its interests in the long term.
The second possible scenario is provocative, but its possibility cannot be
denied. This scenario is based on the assumption that mutual agreement among
administrative structures in the Member States can create a unified model of
governance in the EU, with multi-level governance operating as a ‘regulatory
state.’43 This scenario is dominated by a process of policy development which
is routine and technically smooth. The functions and competences of the various
levels would remain virtually unchanged, but there would be networks of
various regulatory institutions among the Member States, their aim being to
ensure the equal implementation of the acquis throughout the EU. If this is
ensured in tandem with the values of the EAS in all Member States, that will
promote the development of a technologically unified system of governance.
This scenario is partially based on the first theoretical type of governance – the
one which is dominated by a lack of change, a hierarchy among the levels of
governance, and a promotion of the ideas of federalism. It must also be taken
into account, however, that the development of routine in the specification of
policy will occur very slowly, and it will take a long time for a unified model of
governance to emerge. The result of this scenario in the distant future will be a
European state. The father of bureaucracy, Max Weber said ‘great modern state
is absolutely dependent upon bureaucratic basis.’44 Before this can happen, the
administrations of the Member States will have to admit that they are sufficiently

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

118

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 118

IVETA REINHOLDE

identical. Politicians will have to admit the same. This could be a difficult decision,
because the structure of national administration is dependent on the political
structure which prevails in the country. Second, administrative apparatuses
are considered to be a partial symbol of sovereignty. This eliminates the possibility that multi-level governance could transform into the administrative
apparatus of a unified state. The only alternative is to create multi-level governance as the administrative apparatus of a federal state. The classical signs of
this have already been seen in practice. Power is distributed between two levels
(the EU and its Member States), with co-operation, authority and resources
regulated by EU treaties. EU law stands above the laws of Member States,
because qualified majority voting allows the EU to take decisions even if not
all Member States agree – decisions which all Member States must implement.
This, scenario, too, would allow Latvia to avoid a search for ways of resolving
problems with regional reform. If a federation were established, Latvia would
be a state in that federation. To become a powerful state, however, it would
have to establish a powerful mechanism for formulating state interests, and it
would have to work together far more actively with local governments. This
raises the question of the form of co-operation between the national level as
one party and the regional and local level as the other.
The third could, to a certain extent, be called a ‘reform’ scenario. It is based
on the assumption that nearly all of the reforms identified in the White Paper
‘European Governance’ will be introduced in response to political challenges and
to the alienation of many EU residents and that new reforms will be planned.
The pace of reform would increase. No matter how well planned and implemented, however, reforms are not a solution if their goal is not clearly identified. The scenario of reform would make sure that the EU is not accused of
inactivity, but it would also extend the period of reflection on Europe’s future.
Latvia’s advantage in this case is similar to that which it would experience
under the first scenario. It could avoid work on its internal administrative
problems. It is hard to say which of the scenarios would be best for Latvia and
Europe, however, because the development of multi-level governance fully
depends on political decisions vis-à-vis the future of Europe. The aforementioned scenarios, moreover, can overlap or change under the influence of varying
political circumstances.
To return to the two theoretically constructed types of multi-level governance, one must say that they define the way in which multi-level governance

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 119

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

119

should be developed. In practice, the two types exist already, and they are
both used to some extent, but the fact is that there are still many chances to
develop and improve the system. Multi-level governance, moreover, is not a
mechanism which is created and then left to its own devices. It is a mechanism
which should help Europe to achieve its political and economic goals. The main
question as to the development of multi-level governance is not the number of
levels, but rather the content of the process. If one draws parallels to the building
of a home, one can say that it is possible to build an architecturally perfect
structure which is entirely inappropriate for people’s lives.

References and notes
1 Governance is a fairly broad concept, one which speaks to processes in political systems

and emphasises that the processes of national governance and determination and implementation of policy involve not just government institutions, but also private actors, nongovernmental organisations and local communities. Governance is also seen as a system
which has institutions that regulate themselves, which makes it possible for them to
achieve results more effectively. Generally speaking, however, the link between the term
‘governance’ and the term ‘administration’ is very powerful. When one speaks of governance, one often stresses that the cornerstone for governance is the administrative aspect.
2 Hix, S. The Political System of the European Union. Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, p. 220.
3 Marks, G. and Hooghes, L. Types of Multi-Level Governance. European Integration Online
Papers, Vol. 5, No. 11, p. 3. See http://eiop.or.at/eiop/2001-011a.htm.
4 Marks, G. Structural Policy and Multi-Level Governance in the EC. In: Cafruny, W. A. and
Rosenthal, G. (eds.). The State of the European Community. Volume 2: The Maastricht Debates
and Beyond. Harlow: Longman Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Reiner (tâ ir grâm. latv. val.),
1993, p. 392.
5 Knodt, M. International Embeddedness of European Multi-Level Governance. Journal of
European Public Policy, Vol. 11, No. 4, August 2004, p. 701.
6 Marks, G. and Hooghes, L. Types of Multi-Level Governance. European Integration Online
Papers, Vol. 5, No. 11, p. 4.
7 Ibid, p. 5.
8 Ibid., p. 6.
9 Marks, G. and Hooghes, L. Unravelling the Central State, But How? Types of Multi-Level
Governance, IHS Political Science Series, No. 87, 2003, pp. 19–20.
10 Marks, G. and Hooghes, L. Types of Multi-Level Governance. European Integration Online
Papers, Vol. 5, No. 11, p. 9.
11 Ibid., table 3.
12 Hix, S. The Political System of the European Union. Palgrave Macmillan , 2005, p. 221.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

120

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 120

IVETA REINHOLDE

13 Committee of the Regions. Procedures for Local and Regional Authority Participation in

European Policy Making in the Member States. CoR Studies E-1/2005. Brussels, January
2005, p. 8.
14 Bache, I. and Flinders, M. Themes and Issues in Multi-Level Governance. In: Bache, I. and
Flinders, M. (eds.). Multi-Level Governance. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 2.
www.oxfordscholaship.com
15 Marks, G. and Hooghes, L. Types of Multi-Level Governance. European Integration Online
Papers, Vol. 5, No. 11, p. 15.
16 SIGMA Papers No. 27, European Principles for Public Administration. OECD, SIGMA,
1999, p. 15.
17 Nizzo. C. The European Administrative Space and the Role of the Court of Justice. OECD,
SIGMA, Paris, 1999, pp. 8, 9.
18 SIGMA Papers No. 27, European Principles for Public Administration, OECD, SIGMA,
1999, p. 8.
19 Briede, J. Par samçrîgumu administratîvajâ procesâ [On Commensurability in Administrative Process]. Latvijas Vçstnesis, Jurista Vârds, No. 16, 20 April 2000.
20 SIGMA Papers No 27 European Principles for Public Administration. OECD, SIGMA,
1999, p. 10.
21 Ibid., p. 14.
22 Kuhnle, S. Survival of the European Welfare State. ARENA Working Papers 19, 1999. See
www.arena.uio.no/publications/wp99_19.htm. Last viewed 1 December 2005.
23 Jacoby, H. The Bureaucratisation of the World. University of California Press, 1973, p. 31.
24 White Paper ‘European Governance’. Brussels, 25 July 2001, COM (2001) 428 final, p. 10.
25 Ibid.
26 Ibid.
27 Ibid.
28 Ibid., p. 33.
29 Grindle, M. and Thomas, J.W. Public Choice and Policy Change. Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1991, p. 122.
30 White Paper ‘European Governance’. Brussels, 25 July 2001, COM (2001) 428 final, p. 14.
31 A Constitution for Europe, http://europa.eu/constitution. Last viewed 23 November
2006.
32 Ibid.
33 Deklarâcija par Ministru kabineta iecerçto darbu [Declaration on the Plans of the Cabinet
of Ministers]. 7 August 1997. See http://www.mk.gov.lv/index.php/?id=22&page=967.
Last viewed 7 April 2004.
34 Ibid.
35 2000 Progress Report From the Commission on Latvia’s Progress Towards Accession. 8
November 2000. See http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/enlargement/report_11_00/pdf/en/
lv_en.pdf, p. 15.
36 The strategy ‘Latvia’s Membership in the European Union – Basic Principles, Goals,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 121

Multi-Level Governance in the EU: How Many Floors Will the Building Have?

121

Priorities and Activities, 2007–2013’, announced as an informative report by the Meeting
of State Secretaries. 1 June 2006.
37 Ministrija uzklausa LPS viedokli par stratçìijas ‘Latvija Eiropas Savienîbâ’ prioritâtçm
[Ministry Listens to LPS Views About Priorities in the ‘Latvia in the European Union’
Strategy]. See www.am.gov.lv/lv/Jaunumi/PazinojumiPresei/2005/novembris/30-4/?print=on.
Last viewed 2 November 2006.
38 Ibid.
39 Cabinet of Ministers Regulation No. 596. The Procedure for Drafting, Confirming and
Representing the National Position of the Republic of Latvia on European Union Issues.
16 August 2005. See http://www.likumi.lv/doc.php?id=9114689. Last viewed 13 July 2006.
40 Latvia’s Development Plan (unified programmatic document), 1st target programme,
2004–2006, Rîga, 2003, p. 121.
41 Pabriks, A. Vienoti daudzveidîbâ [Unified in Diversity]. Diena, No. 18 (4153), 22 January
2005.
42 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, informational report ‘Latvia’s Membership in the European
Union – Basic Principles, Goals, Priorities and Activities, 2007–2013’, announced as an
informative report by the Meeting of State Secretaries. 1 June 2006, op. cit.
43 Rosamond, B. Theories of European Integration. Palgrave, 2000, p. 108.
44 Weber, M. Essays in Sociology. Translated and edited by Gerth, H.H. and C. Wright Mills.
Oxford University Press, 1958, p. 211.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 122

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

The Development of European Economic Integration:
from Coal and Steel to a Single Economic Area
and Toward the Challenges of the Future
Now here, you see, it takes
all the running you can do to keep in the same place.
If you want to get somewhere else,
You must run at least twice as fast as that.
Lewis Carroll. ‘Through the Looking-Glass,
and What Alice Found There’

Introduction
The basic issue in this paper is the evolution of economic integration in
Europe since the end of the Second World War and the relationship between
this integration and the European system of values. I will try to consider the main
problems which may be faced by the European economy in the near future,
taking into account the global trends of economic development. In the first
part of the paper, let us take a brief look at the origins of the European Union
and the importance of economic aspects in this process. Then we shall turn to
the achievements that have been made during this period, both from the
perspective of integration and from that of economic development. Finally, we
shall assess trends in global economic development since the origins of the EU,
focusing on the way in which they have influenced economic development of
the Union. In conclusion, we shall try to characterise the main problems which
the EU economy might encounter in the near and more distant future, as well
as possible solutions to those problems. Let us also look at Latvia’s situation in
this context, judging the extent to which economic development problems in
the EU might also be important in terms of Latvia’s development.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 123

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

123

We all know that the roots of the European Union rest in economic considerations. During the initial phase of development, these factors encouraged
individual countries to work on mutual co-operation despite the serious
historical conflicts which were the result of two world wars. We can say that
the economic interests of European countries largely led to the further process
of integration – one that has considerably surpassed the initially defined economic goals. Since the Paris and Rome treaties, economic integration in Europe
has gradually moved to the back burner, and today it is just one of several
components of integration.
Is this because the job is finished? Of course not, but one must admit that
quite a bit has been achieved in the area of economic integration, at least in
comparison to other areas. We can speak of free trade, the movement toward
economic and monetary union (EMU), freer movement of labour in the EU, etc.
At the same time, we must remember that economic policy in the individual
Member States still relates to key political instruments, and the use of those
instruments may, in certain cases, hinder Europe’s ability to pursue its common goals. An increasingly important issue is whether a single economic area
really is the optimum goal. Would this ensure that Europe’s initial values are
developed in the context of the globalised economy of today? Even more, have
present-day global economic development trends created a situation in which
Europe will once again have to prove that it has not lost competitiveness and
is ready not only to influence processes within the EU, but also to preserve a
key role at the global level?

Economic integration as a motivation for European unification
after the Second World War
As was noted in the introduction, economic motivations were the main
reason why the major powers of Europe engaged in purely pragmatic considerations after the Second World War and managed to start talking about
closer co-operation. Despite significant achievements in the field of culture
and economics in the past, Europe’s actual situation was far less than enviable –
economies were destroyed, infrastructures were gone, and co-operation was
hindered by memories of the war which had just ended. Leading European
politicians, however, were quick to understand the need for closer co-operation.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

124

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 124

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

Speaking at Zurich University in September 1946, Winston Churchill said that
a partnership between Germany and France must be the first step toward renewing the ‘European family.’ In 1948, the Benelux countries formed a customs
union which largely served as a model for the further economic integration of
Europe. The main event in this regard, however, was the Schuman Declaration,
which was essentially based on the purely pragmatic need for Germany and
France to co-operate in the production of coal and steel. A joint governing institution had to be established. The Schuman Declaration, which was issued in 1950,
included the idea that this co-operation could create foundations for Europe as
a federative state. Movement toward a unified Europe, in other words, began on the
basis of the need to work together in the economic arena. Economic integration,
indeed, was the only truly realistic path toward political unity in the future.
The next important step toward European unification was taken in 1951,
when the Treaty of Paris on the establishment of the European Coal and Steel
Community was signed. The most important economic principles in this agreement focused on economic growth, facilitation of employment, and enhanced
standards of living in Member States. It must be noted that despite the fact that
these goals were largely related to problems which seemed to be of importance
in the post-war context, European priorities today are still very much linked to
these particular subjects.
The Treaty of Rome of 1957 established the European Economic Community,
and that was the logical next step in bringing European countries together.
The treaty defined the fundamental principles for the development of Europe.
It officially defined the principle of ‘four freedoms’ – the free movement of
goods, services, capital and persons in the newly established economic space.
The Treaty of Rome also spoke to co-ordination of economic policy among
Member States, and this was a very important step in recognising mutual links
among European economies. The treaty also defined fundamental developmental
principles such as harmonised development of regions, balanced economic
growth, and enhanced improvements to standards of living.These ideas and
goals were not conceptually new in and of themselves, but the innovation in this
case related to the fact that a group of countries, as opposed to a single nation
state, agreed to pursue the relevant goals. From the institutional perspective,
Europe implemented the innovative process of creating supranational institutions which were assigned the task of achieving the goals. Once the process
was started, it created conflicts on far more than one occasion between the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 125

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

125

economic interests of Europe and those of individual Member States, and between the ways in which these interests were pursued. Nevertheless, this was
unquestionably a key step toward the launch of European economic integration.

Implementation of Europe’s fundamental economic values:
an evaluation
Most of the values which were defined for Europe in the 1950s remain of
importance today although the situation today represents a massive step forward in comparison to the Europe which was ravaged by war. Most European
countries now are among the world’s wealthiest nations. The economic goals
which were formulated in the Treaty of Paris and the Treaty of Rome were
dynamic, because the main desire in the post-war period was to ensure proper
living conditions. Today, by contrast, this aim has been affected by the process
of globalisation as the main goal is not to fall behind other regions of the world –
regions which are developing even more dynamically in terms of economic
growth. In this context, we can conclude that the European economic values
which were defined in the treaties of the 1950s remain important in the presentday context, even if their interpretation has often changed.
European countries have taken great strides toward the establishment of a
single economic area, but we must also admit that progress has not always
been sufficiently fast. The process of economic integration in Europe is far
from finished, although the initial goals of economic integration are often seen
as self-evident. There have been certain changes in the way in which steps are
taken toward further European integration. The Maastricht Treaty, for instance,
was a key step toward political integration in Europe, even though it also spoke
to fundamentally important aspects of economic integration. In this context, it
is likely that the Maastricht Treaty will be remembered mostly because the
word ‘economic’ was removed from the name of the European Economic
Community. Did that mean that economic issues were no longer a priority in
Europe, that debates about the issue had been exhausted? On the contrary –
economic integration in Europe is not a completed process, it is a process which
faces ever new challenges, particularly in terms of the integration of new EU
Member States. As was noted previously, however, Europe is prepared to debate
more than just issues related to economic integration.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

126

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 126

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

Europe is forced to deal with ever new challenges in the economic arena. In
the future, European development will be based more extensively on the ability
of Europe, as a single economic area, to compete in the global market. Issues
which relate to the ability of this single economic area to compete with other
important economic entities in the world will come to the fore. Competitiveness
will become the most important prerequisite for achieving the values that were
defined in the 1950s – growth, employment and enhanced standards of living.
There will be a need for increasingly co-ordinated policies in pursuit of these
goals – policies which relate to the training and retention of an educated and
competitive labour force. This has to do with issues such as education, employment and also migration. Europe must be prepared to implement co-ordinated
policies in these areas.
Despite the fact that the Treaty of Rome was signed half a century ago, some
of its principles have not yet been fully implemented. That is partially because
of EU enlargement and other objective circumstances, but it is clear that it is
too early to speak of the completion of economic integration in Europe. Even
more – it will be possible to continue with economic integration and enhancement of competitiveness only if Europe manages to implement unified policies
which are focused on the future. The EU is still far behind the United States in
terms of the integration of various economic processes, and it often suffers from
the fact that laws differ in various Member States. These factors may create the
greatest risk for Europe as a single economic area in terms of its competitiveness
in the global market. This is all the more true given that the main global
competitors have already resolved problems of this nature by creating prerequisites for more effective co-operation within their individual economies.
When it comes to the ability of Europe to maintain its leading role in the
global economy, it has to be said that despite the fact that Europe has taken
great strides in terms of material welfare since the Second World War, still
there are threats which may cause changes in that situation over a longer
period of time. Table 1 shows differences in economic growth rates between
the EU and certain other areas of the world – ones which will probably play a
more and more significant role in the global economy in future years.
This table makes it quite clear that Europe’s economic development has
slowed down in the 21st century. Rapid economic growth in India and China
is fostered by the low average income level in those countries in comparison to
that in the EU, but it is, nevertheless, clear that these major countries are

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 127

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

127
Table 1

GDP growth in the EU and certain countries (% annually)
2000–2005

2006–20201

EU- 25

1.8

2.1

USA

2.8

2.9

Japan

1.5

0.7

China

9.3

6.0

India

6.4

5.9

S o u r c e s: World Bank, Economist Intelligence Unit.

becoming increasingly important competitors in the global market. Europe’s
situation might be even further complicated by several other key factors,
which will be discussed in the next chapters. Economic growth indicators in
the EU are fairly positive, true, but future changes in the global economy must
also be taken into account.

Future challenges for Europe
Economic integration in Europe is a long-term process which began more
than 50 years ago. There have, of course, been massive changes in the European
and global economy during that period in time. In this section, therefore, let us
turn to the key challenges which Europe will face in the future, looking, too, at
their effects and possible solutions. Not all of these challenges are of a purely
economic nature, but they will be reviewed from the perspective of economic
development. Such long-term issues as aging of populations, to be sure, are of
fundamental economic importance.
1. Population aging
Europe has historically had to deal with problems of a demographic nature.
During the 20th century, these difficulties were primarily caused by two world

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

128

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 128

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

wars which led to a significant reduction in the working age population.
Emigration and increased mortality both played a role in this. The issue which
I would like to emphasise in this paper, however, has to do with significant
declines in fertility rates in Europe. This will have consequences over the long
term, and not just demographic consequences either. The most important consequences have to do with the fact that if the current intensity of fertility and
mortality is preserved, the average age of the people of Europe will continue to
increase, thus reducing the proportion of working-age people in each population.
The issue of aging populations has long been considered in Europe on the
basis of more than just demographic issues. Forecasts about changes in population numbers conjure up ideas about what the people of Europe might expect
in the nearer or more distant future. The United Nations, for instance, have
issued population projections which suggest that over the next 50 years, the
population of Europe may decline by some 10%.2 What is more, we must remember that in the near future, Europe will experience lower fertility rates than
those in many other parts of the world. It is expected that by 2050, the proportion
of working-age people in Europe will be at a level of 57.4% of all residents,
while elsewhere in the world it is forecast to be at a level of 63.7% (Table 2). In
that case, the demographic burden in Europe will be higher than elsewhere in
the world, and that may exacerbate the problem of labour shortages. It must also
be recognised that rapid population increases in most of the world’s countries
mean that the situation in Europe is quite unique.
We can, of course, be optimists about this issue and say that Europe has dealt
successfully with more than one situation in which population numbers have
dropped significantly in a short period of time – once again, we can consider
the two world wars of the 20th century. The global situation, however, has
changed in this context, too. Approximately a century ago, economic policies
in Europe were minimally influenced by countries such as China and India. In
the early 21st century, by contrast, these are two countries which are increasing
their importance in the global economy at a very rapid pace indeed. Foreign
trade policies are becoming more and more liberal, transport costs are, generally
speaking, declining, and the export of goods and services is becoming increasingly important. All of these factors persistanly force Europe to deal with
countries which, quite recently, could not compete to any significant degree
with the world’s economically developed countries.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 129

129

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

Table 2

Forecasts of demographic indicators in the world’s regions
Proportion of
working-age
population (%)

Proportion of
population aged
50+ in 2050 (%)

Median age of
population in
2025

Median age of
population in
2050

World

63.7

16.1

32.8

37.8

Europe

57.4

27.6

44.4

47.1

Asia

64.3

17.5

33.7

39.9

Africa

64.7

6.7

21.8

27.4

Latvia

57.1

29.1

44.3

50.5

S o u r c e: World Population Prospects (UN).

Table 2 offers a more precise look at the European problem of aging populations. The median age of the European population in 2050 will be 47.1 years,
for instance, which will be nearly 10 years higher than the world average. The
proportion of population aged 65 or older in Europe in 2050, moreover, will be
at a level of 27.6% — far above the indicator elsewhere in the world..
The worsening demographic situation in Europe must also be assessed from
the perspective of the financial status of countries. Solidarity of generations is
a principle which is put to widespread use in many countries to ensure
people’s old age pensions. If adequate attention is not paid to long-term developmental trends, however, there is the risk that economic growth rates and
lowering proportions of working age population will endanger the overall
financial situation of the relevant country. In other words, the principle of solidarity of generations may fall under threat because of a significant reduction
in the number of working-age people. In the case of the EU, these are problems
which are left largely under the supervision of individual Member States,
because there is no unified approach to pensions and social aid. Still, the problem
may come to the surface if Europe finds itself encountering unexpected problems
of an economic nature. It is very important, too, to remember that the retirement
age may well be increased in various countries as the life expectancy of
Europeans grows longer.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 130

130

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

The situation in Latvia is not particularly clear in this regard. Table 2 shows
that Latvia’s demographic indicators are such that Latvia can expect even
more serious problems than the average country in Europe. Though Latvia’s
pension system was designed relatively recently, its authors took into account
the anticipated drop in the number of working-age people in the country. This
will become important when those children who were born in the 1990s enter
the labour market, because they are considerably fewer in number than those
who were born in the two previous decades. Rapid economic growth has so
far supported Latvia’s social budget, but the authors of the country’s pension
plan did not take into account the fact that Latvia would be joining the
European Union and that the EU labour market would be open to Latvia’s
residents. From the perspective of the social budget, this is a worrisome situation,
because of unpredictable drops in tax income which have no effect on the
number of people who are retired or retiring. The situation might be improved
to a certain extent if Latvia were to open up its own labour market. That could
bring in additional tax income to compensate for income lost from those who
have emigrated. In that case, however, Latvia, as a potential place of employment, will face serious competition from other EU Member States, and it might
well face domestic policy consequences as a result of an excessively hasty
opening up of the labour market.

2. Europe’s competitiveness
in the global market
As noted above, the origins of the European Union in the wake of the
Second World War were closely linked to the need to establish closer economic
co-operation. The relevant issues were important enough to convince recent
enemies on the battlefield – Germany and France – that closer economic cooperation would be mutually advantageous. In subsequent years, there were
fewer and fewer questions about closer economic co-operation, and that facilitated the further development of the EU. However, the issue of economic
integration, which was initially the primary motivation for closer ties, has
gradually been pushed to the back burner since the beginning of the process.
Doubts about the need for economic integration dissipated as foreign trade
volumes increased, but they were replaced by doubts about other issues.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 131

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

131

In this context, it is important to consider changes that have occurred in the
global economy over the last 50 years and to think about whether the fundamental principles of the Paris and Rome treaties are still of key importance in
Europe now and in the future. At the close of the Second World War, Europe’s
economy was devastated, and the renewal of industry and trade was a key
priority. The issue of global competitiveness was not really on the table at that
time, because foreign trade growth was not yet one of the most important
driving engines for economic development. In subsequent years, however, the
European economy developed successfully, and participation in international
trade and the need to strengthen external competitiveness became more and
more important. However, we must remember the fundamental changes in
the global economy which occurred during the same time period. In the mid-20th
century, the main competition for European countries in the world of foreign
trade came from the USA, but by the end of the 20th century, Japan was one of
the main players in the world of international commerce. Furthermore, economic
development trends in the 20th century were focused on market liberalisation,
because countries wished to gain greater income from foreign trade by putting
their competitive advantages to work. The General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT) and, later, the World Trade Organisation worked to promote
economic integration in the world and to reduce trade barriers. It must certainly be admitted that this work is far from complete even today, but increasing
income in European countries, trade liberalisation, and the easier flow of
goods, services and workers among countries – all of this created a situation in
which countries which had been among the most important players in the
global economy of the 20th century found themselves at the risk of losing their
leading positions. Low labour costs became a key factor in the decision of
businesses from the world’s developed countries to move their manufacturing
facilities to places where costs are lower, where there are fewer limitations
related to environmental protection, etc.
In a situation of this type, countries which can offer lower labour costs and
larger labour forces play an increasingly important role in the global economy.
In Europe, these trends have led to the process of deindustrialisation, and the
result is that approximately two-thirds of added value in Europe today are
based on the service sector. China and India are among the most important
competitors – their role has expanded over the last 20 years and will continue
to expand in future years as a result of lower manufacturing costs. All of this

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 132

132

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

means that countries which are at a comparatively lower level of economic
development can develop their own industries more quickly and take part in
foreign trade so as to earn revenues that are not available in the domestic
market.
Europeans may be quite surprised at the rapid economic growth of China
and India, but specialists in the area of economic history point out that right
up until the Industrial Revolution in Europe, Asian countries played the leading
role in the global economy. The situation underwent a radical change only at
the end of the 19th century, when the leading role was taken over by the British
Empire and the United States. For most of the 20th century, dominance in the
global economy was enjoyed by the United States, European countries, as well
as the Soviet Union and Japan. It must be noted, however, that the most important trends during this period had to do with globalisation and a rapid
increase in the importance of foreign trade in the global economy. Countries
with lower income levels have been adapting to this situation more and more
successfully in recent times. Removal of trade barriers has stimulated this
process to a very great degree, and many barriers have been lifted by the
GATT and the WTO. The next table shows the proportions of the world’s most
important economic players in the global economy over the last 25 years.
Table 3

The proportion of important countries/regions in the global economy (%)3
1980

1990

2005

EU -254

30.8

31.0

32.0

USA

23.8

25.7

29.5

Japan

9.0

13.4

10.8

China

2.6

1.7

5.3

India

1.5

1.4

1.8

S o u r c e: IMF.

As can be seen in Table 3, the European Union has maintained an almost
unchanging presence in the global economy over the last 25 years, while the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 133

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

133

role of the United States has continued to increase. In the context of what has
happened in the last decades, the dynamic development of certain Asian countries,
of course, must be particularly re-emphasised. The power of the Chinese economy
continues to increase very rapidly. Referring to the Lewis Carroll’s quote at the
beginning of this paper, one can conclude that Europe has run quickly in the
last 25 years, but it will have to run even faster if it wants to maintain its leading
role in the global economy in the future, too.
Given the aforementioned changes in the development of the global economy, it is important to determine whether Europe is prepared to compete with
other countries in the global marketplace as Europe has recently encountered
problems related to its global competitiveness. Clearly, the European economy
has not been able to compete with many other parts of the world in terms of
labour costs — that has been true for quite some time now. Still, there are
several European countries which spitefully maintain their high ranking on
lists of the world’s most competitive countries. Finland, Sweden and Denmark
can be mentioned as vivid examples — high labour costs do not keep them from
finding themselves high up on those lists. Europeans, apparently, will have to
come to an understanding of why this is true if they are to formulate the desirable direction for Europepe’s economic development. Labour costs are just
one factor in the modern-day global economy, labour productivity factors are
becoming more and more important. The question may instead be this: How
to ensure that European countries have developed the most important prerequisites for a high level of competitiveness? These prerequisites include a
high quality of education that is universally available to everyone, the use of
innovation in production, and the use of high technologies.
Apparently, the most unpleasant aspect of competitiveness in Europe at
this time is that those European countries which are a step ahead of others in
this regard may set an unachievable goal for other Member States, thus turning
the ideal of a unified Europe into a formality or a dream. The World Economic
Forum has released ratings of the competitiveness of various countries in the
world which describe this situation quite well.5 In 2006, the 15 ‘old’ countries
of the European Union were ranked between second place (Finland) and 47th
place (Greece). This clearly illustrates the heterogeneous composition of Europe
from the perspective of global competitiveness. The new Member States do
not lag far behind the others in this regard. Poland, which joined the EU in
2004, is in 48th place on the list – lowest among the new EU Member States.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 134

134

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

Romania and Bulgaria, which were not yet EU Member States at the time of
the study, somewhat break the European mould by appearing on the list in
68th and 72nd place respectively. The next table shows changes in the position
of certain countries on the aforementioned list.
Table 4

Ranking of certain countries on the global competitiveness index
2000

2003

2006

Finland

6

1

2

Sweden

13

3

3

Denmark

14

4

4

Latvia

–

37

36

Greece

34

35

47

Poland

35

45

48

India

49

56

43

China

41

44

54

S o u r c e: World Economic Forum.

The table shows that India and China have remained more or less at the
same level on the competitiveness index, especially in comparison with the
‘weaker’ EU Member States. Poland and Greece have both moved downward
on the list. Definitely, any fundamental conclusions on the basis of this indicator
alone are premature but it is clear that from the perspective of global competitiveness, India and China still have vast untapped development potential.
From the perspective of global competitiveness, the EU will have to cope with
the fact that the competing countries and regions which are creating the greatest
concerns at this time will probably become even more serious competitors in
the future, and not just because of lower costs. Anyone who looks at the indicators of global competitiveness cannot fail to notice the fundamental progress
that has been achieved by numerous countries in Asia. In the future, they will
become serious competitors for European countries, not just because of lower
production costs, but also because of their vast potential in terms of labour
resources and increased educational levels.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 135

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

135

3. The Lisbon Strategy as a possible solution
The situation is not very encouraging even if potential influence of external
factors on European economic development are ignored. Within Europe itself,
there are still quite a few unresolved questions which have to do with the
rational use of the region’s limited labour supply. One of the most widely
discussed topics concerns the free movement of labour. This is a problem
which has not yet been fully resolved since (or because of) the enlargement of
the EU. Barriers against more optimal structuring of production and economic
integration are still in place as a result of this. It is possible that the existing
limitations and periods of transition keep competitive European companies
from finding sufficient workers to compete successfully at the international
level – and that is happening in what is supposedly a unified European economic area!
The economy of the EU has developed in accordance with the economic
priorities which were defined in the treaties of Paris and Rome, and there have
been significant successes in this regard. Despite this, however, it has to be
noted that external economic circumstances have changed substantially during
the ensuing period of time, and there were quite a few economic indicators at
the end of the 20th century which suggested that Europe’s competitiveness
was declining. One was the lower rate of economic growth in comparison to
the main global competitor – the United States. The rate of labour productivity
also increased sluggishly. The demographic aspect may be of great importance
in ensuring long-term economic development. The Lisbon Strategy, thus, may
be interpreted as Europe’s response to the global challenges which have been
reviewed in this paper and which are becoming more and more important for
Europe at this time. To a certain extent, the Lisbon Strategy also indicates that
Europe has comprehended its long term problems and is starting to seek ways
of resolving them.
The stated aim of the Lisbon Strategy is to create (or recreate) Europe as the
world’s most competitive economic space, this despite the comparatively unfavourable trends of the late 20th century. One of the main priorities in the
strategy relates to labour availability and the qualifications of the labour force.
It is certain that the level of people’s income in European countries and the
existence of employee organisations mean that low labour costs will not be an
advantage at the global level in the foreseeable future. Moreover, in purely

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

136

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 136

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

quantitative terms, the European population cannot compete with countries
such as China and India, therefore the strategy, is focused on the more efficient
use of Europe’s labour resources, as well as on increasing the education and
skills of that labour force. Another key issue is financing for research and
science. Given high labour costs in Europe, such spending is necessary so that
the region can compete on the basis of products and services with a particularly high level of added value.
Achieving the goals of the Lisbon Strategy may prove to be a major challenge
for the EU’s Member States, but it must also be admitted that this represents
an opportunity to move in the only strategically correct direction from the perspective of developing Europe’s global competitiveness. Sadly, progress in this
regard has not been encouraging. Overall employment indicators and other
indicators related to the Lisbon Strategy did not change sufficiently by the
year 2005 to allow anyone to say that the strategy was being pursued very
successfully. The overall level of employment in the EU rose from 63.4% in
2000 to 65.2% in 2005.6 This progress does not seem to be sufficient to reach a
level of 70% by 2010. Comparatively more rapid progress has been made in the
employment of women and older people, but there are doubts as to whether
the goals will be achieved with much believability. Another goal is to spend
3% of GDP on science and research, but actual spending is not increasing sufficiently quickly to achieve this.
If we compare Latvia’s indicators to the EU average and to the goals that
are defined in the Lisbon Strategy, it is very important, first of all, to consider
historical aspects, which by no means are homogeneous in all of Europe. It has
been repeated over and over that Latvia’s strengths in comparison to other
Member States include the comparatively high level of women in the labour
market (in 2005, Latvia was close to the goal of 60%) and a high level of overall
education in the country. On the other hand, there are also serious problems –
a low level of research spending and difficulties in increasing the overall level
of employment. Latvia has undergone rapid economic growth over the last
several years, and, hopefully, this will serve as a positive factor in ensuring
greater investments in science and research. In this area in particular, Latvia is
still far below the EU average, and to a certain extent this contradicts the
comparatively high level of education in the country.
From the macroeconomic perspective, Latvia’s competitiveness in external
markets is a critically important issue from the short and long term perspective

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 137

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

137

alike. The country’s development model is based on rapid growth mostly in
those sectors which are focused on the domestic market. This is not a sustainable
model. The Latvia’s negative savings – investment balance over the last few
years has been compensated largely by the inflow of external financial resources into the country, and that has created a situation in which private
sector companies and individuals are borrowing more and more money from
abroad, thus becoming more indebted. Internal market development cannot
maintain a high growth rate for too long, particularly in a country such as
Latvia – one which has an economy that is both small and open. Similar developmental problems have been encountered by other countries which have
experienced rapid growth in specific sectors of their national economies. Economic imbalance causes the risk of diminishing the relevant country’s competitiveness in the external market for a long time in the future. Latvia must think
about this risk, because growth only in sectors related to the domestic market,
along with a high rate of inflation under the circumstances of a fixed currency
exchange rate can create fundamental long-term problems with the country’s
external competitiveness.

Conclusions
The integration of European countries which began in the mid-20th century
has been driven by internal and external factors alike. Initially, the emergence
of the EU was linked closely to the economic interests of its Member States.
Countries were helped to overcome the post-war economic disintegration of
the continent. The need to merge their limited resources so as to ensure economic growth proved to be a very important driving force, one which allowed
countries to overcome political disagreements. Results achieved during the
first 50 years after the launch of integration have been very significant. In
terms of GDP, the EU economy is the largest in the world, even beating the
USA. Economic development trends in the world, however, have endangered
Europe’s leading role in the global economy which may fall under threat in the
future. The most important short term indicators point to declining economic
growth rates, a decline in labour productivity growth to the point where it has
fallen below the level in competing regions, and unresolved issues related to
stimulating employment levels. In the long term, the demographic problem

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

138

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 138

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

may prove to be the one which hinders economic growth to the greatest degree.
One can already predict a substantial decline in the number of European
working age population.
Assuming that Europe wish to retain its leading position in the world economy, solutions to the aforementioned problems can be sought in the following
directions:
1) Europe continues attempts toward science-intensive production which is
focused on high technologies so as to preserve its leadership in the global
economy despite the problem of labour shortages (a highly qualified
labour force, lower employment levels in the future);
2) Europe partially compensates for the labour shortage and the increasing
labour costs by liberalising immigration, by competing with developing
countries, and by simultaneously protecting its advantages in scienceintensive production (a labour force of both high and low qualifications,
moderate employment levels);
3) Europe preserves the existing model of development, adapting it to the
expected demographic trends – promoting employment of the elderly
and ensuring higher participation in the labour market among all age
and gender groups (a highly qualified labour force, attempts to achieve
higher employment rates in the future based on higher participation in
the labour market).
The approach taken by the EU has not yet yielded clearly positive results.
The Lisbon Strategy, which dates back to 2000, is aimed at increasing employment rates and at developing science and research through greater investments
in that particular area. This is a strategically correct direction as it reflects one
of the main possible trends for development, but progress, sadly, has been
insufficient. Europe is not much closer to any long-term solution to its problems.
Moreover, even successful implementation of the Lisbon Strategy raises serious
concerns as to whether that will be enough in the long term. As economic
growth continues, the demand for workers will only increase in Europe. There
are many EU Member States which have high levels of economic growth and
which are encountering labour shortages – Ireland, Spain and the UK are all
recent examples. Many countries are importing workers both within the EU
and outside of it. This situation is not in contradiction to the goals of economic
development, but it has to be admitted that this scenario for development
involves certain risks. The inflow of labour is usually aimed at filling jobs

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 139

The Development of European Economic Integration: from Coal and Steel..

139

which are, for one reason or another, not attractive to local workers. This
approach may create a dual labour market resulting in greater social tension
which certainly does not facilitate the emergence of a single economic area in
Europe.
Europe’s most important long term challenges have to do with the continent’s
ability to ensure sustainable economic development based on the ideals of a
single economic area, also taking into account the demographic problems
which may well have a deleterious effect on Europe’s leading role in the global
economy. Under circumstances of globalisation, Europe’s role may be seriously
threatened unless steps are taken to enhance the continent’s own competitiveness.
Development in Europe is possible only if its economy is knowledge-based
but even then unfavourable demographic rate may threaten its future competitiveness.
Another important factor is the way in which economic decisions are taken
in Europe. Economic policies have historically been based on common values,
but many economic decisions are still taken at the national level. The political
situation in individual Member States often determines whether decisions are
in line with the common interests and values of European countries. It can be
expected that this situation will remain in place for the next few years, and the
supporters of common European initiatives will have to face opposition on the
part of individual Member States in those cases when the EU’s common economic interests run afoul of the interests of those Member States.
Latvia’s development in this context must be evaluated from a similar perspective. Despite rapid economic growth since accession to the EU, there are
still problems which can threaten long term development (demographics, difficulties in enhancing competitiveness). Indeed, Latvia’s situation may be even
more complex, because as it implements changes which are aimed at long
term economic development, it must also deal with domestic policy problems
which do not always enable the adoption of the most justified solutions therefore, it is very important to hold a widespread debate about economic development options. Latvia’s approach must be one which the population supports.
Given information about economic growth in Latvia over the last few years,
we can conclude that during this period in time, we have satisfied the need to
run very fast, indeed. Structural development trends in the economy, however,
do not ensure that Latvia is really ‘running’ in the right direction or that it will
have the strength to keep running for a long time to come. There are significant

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 140

140

ANDREJS JAKOBSONS

long term problems which can have a serious influence on Latvia’s rapid
growth in the future.

References and notes
1 Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts.
2 See http://esa.un.org/unpp/p2k0data.asp.

3 Data from the International Monetary Fund’s ‘World Economic Outlook’.
4 See http://www.weforum.org/en/index.htm.
5 Ibid.
6 For purposes of comparison, the data in this section refer only to the 15 ‘old’ EU Member
States.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 141

DAUNIS AUERS

Friend of Foe?
Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy
Latvia’s accession to the European Union (EU) was generally a very benign
process. The Latvian political elite was largely unified in its aspiration to join
the European Union as part of a broader programme of ‘returning to the west’,
which also encompassed accession to NATO, the Council of Europe, and a
host of other ‘western’ organisations. However, this elite cohesion, coupled with
a weak, fragmented, and largely discredited eurosceptic opposition, meant that
there was relatively little qualitative debate on the pros and cons of EU accession.
The partial exception was the European Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
Eurosceptics claimed that accession would lead to the collapse of traditional
Latvian farming practices (indeed, the perceived negative impact on agriculture
was named as the most important reason to vote ‘No’ to accession by almost
60% of people who called themselves eurosceptic).1 In contrast, ‘Yes’ campaigners
emphasised the clear economic benefits of EU membership to the farming sector.
As Jânis Lapðe, the policy advisor to Minister of Agriculture, wrote in 2003, about
the level of CAP funding that Latvia was guaranteed after accession: ‘The Latvian
countryside has never seen this much money!’2
However, the 2004 enlargement coincided with, and even partially caused,
a Europe-wide restructuring and rethinking of the multi-faceted relationship
between the European Union, the Member States, citizens, and agricultural
policy. In addition to the accession of eight post-communist states with large,
only partially modernised agricultural sectors, increasing environmental,
trade liberalisation and public pressures are changing the nature of farming,
and the shape of agricultural and rural communities. While these challenges
are not new, the British Minister of Agriculture has called their ‘scale and pace
unprecedented.’3

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 142

142

DAUNIS AUERS

These forces and resulting debates accurately reflect the fact that agriculture,
both in Latvia and elsewhere in Europe, is fundamentally different to other
sectors of the economy. It is laden with values and national cultural heritage.
For example, images of the Latvian countryside were used extensively by the
‘Yes’ campaign in the 2003 Latvian referendum on accession to the European
Union. One widely disseminated advertisement pictured a beautifully restored
traditional Latvian farmhouse kitchen with a modern laptop angled on a table
beneath an open window looking out onto an idealistic, well-tended small
Latvian farmyard. The implication was almost clumsy in its obviousness –
accession to the European Union will lead to a regeneration and modernisation
of the Latvian countryside, but, crucially, without any loss of tradition.
This reflects the special place that agriculture takes in the Latvian psyche.
As a recently modernised, geographically small nation, the overwhelming
majority of Latvians have extensive roots in the countryside, be it relatives, a
family farm, or a summer house. Indeed, these connections played an important
role during the Soviet era, with these rural contacts supplementing the relatively
meager selection of food products available in urban shops and markets. Indeed, Rîga still empties out during summer weekends, and becomes a virtual
ghost-town during the midsummer Jâòi festival (which itself is a celebration of
‘Latvianness’, Latvian values, and Latvian’s relationship with the countryside,
as much as an ancient pagan celebration).
However, the special place of agriculture in the European psyche has made
agricultural policy rather difficult to reform. Nevertheless, the CAP is likely to
see radical changes over the next decade. This article considers the factors
driving these reforms, the likely direction of the reforms, and it attempts to
locate Latvia’s position in the debate through a values and interests based approach. The article first considers the current structure of CAP, and then the
main elements of the current European debate, which is focused around
national interests as well as both national and European values. It then attempts to identify a future model of European agricultural policy that both
serves Latvia’s interests and is based on core values.

Agriculture and the European Union
The second half of the twentieth century has seen the rapid enlargement of
the European Community/European Union,4 from initially encompassing six

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 143

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

143

states in 1957, to fifteen by the end of the century, and twenty-seven by 2007.
Each enlargement has, naturally, also entailed the entry of the new Member
States into the CAP. Thus for many years the CAP has shaped European food
production and the rural landscape. Indeed, agricultural policy was the first
major European Community spending policy, and still consumes around 45%
of the total annual budget. Thus while the inadequacies of the still-evolving
Common Foreign and Security Policy, or virulent trade disputes with China or
the United States of America tend to hog European media headlines, agriculture
still dominates the European budget.
The disproportionate centrality of agriculture in the European polity in the
modern era is largely a relic from the past – the result of a congruence of several
unique economic and political considerations in the 1950s. First, the memory
of food shortages during and after the Second World War meant that food
production was both an area of concern, and priority, for a great many European politicians. Second, agriculture was central to the European economies at
this time, employing about 20% of the total workforce and producing around
12% of the EU-6 Gross National Product. Third, food prices are an important
component of individual spending, and thus industrial wage costs. The CAP
was thus seen as an instrument to equalise food prices between the Member
States, a core element of creating a true common market. Fourth, agriculture
was a key compromise between France and Germany. France feared that Germany would substantially benefit from the creation of the European Economic
Community because of its larger, more productive and efficient industrial
sector. Thus creating a system whereby the benefits of the common market
would be partly redistributed via the CAP was the price that Germany had to
pay for the creation of the European Economic Community.5
Article 39 of the 1957 Treaty of Rome establishing the European Community
listed five key objectives for the CAP:6
■ increase agricultural productivity,
■ ensure a fair standard of living for the agricultural community,
■ stabilise markets,
■ provide certainty of food supply,
■ ensure that supplies reach consumers at reasonable prices.
The central policy to achieve these aims was the introduction of a community-wide target price for most farm products. The two primary mechanisms
adopted to maintain this target price were import levies and intervention

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

144

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 144

DAUNIS AUERS

prices. Import levies ensured that products entering the community market
would not undercut the prices of domestic producers. Intervention prices,
decided annually by the ministers of agriculture, committed the community to
purchase and store produce in order to artificially reduce supply and thus
maintain the price of the product. On the plus side, this encouraged European
farmers to increase output, eventually making Europe self-sufficient in food.
Thus, the CAP met a number of its key objectives. However, these policies also
led to huge food production surpluses which were dealt with by subsidised
product storage (butter mountains and olive oil lakes), exported surpluses, or
even destroyed agricultural products, an ethically dubious practice in an era
when parts of the world were suffering from extreme hunger and starvation.
Import levies also arosed controversy for failing the worlds least developed
countries for whom agricultural produce is one of the few products that they
can produce. And intervention prices artificially raised foodstuff prices for
consumers. Moreover, the major beneficiaries have been the larger, more industrialised, efficient farmers, rather than the idealised European smallholder.
Finally, by the 1970s and 1980s the CAP was absorbing about two-thirds of the
community budget, and thus limiting Community actions in other areas.
As a result of these problems, proposals to radically reshape the CAP have
been raging almost as long as the policy has existed. However, beginning with
the Mansholt plan in 1968, substantial reforms to the CAP were consistently
watered down by politicians, largely because of the extensive domestic and
transnational political influence of the farming lobby (which has a strong
financial incentive to maintain the current financing system).7 Although a
number of reforming measures were carried out (milk quotas were introduced
in 1984, and agricultural land ‘set aside’ in 1988), they were rather piecemeal
and did little to change the essence of CAP.
This changed in the 1990s for two major reasons. First, the enlargement of
the European Union to the post-communist countries of east-central Europe
edged ever nearer. It was clear that the CAP had to be reformed prior to this
accession, to avoid the Union budget being bankrupted. Second, Europe fell
under increasing World Trade Organisation external pressure to reform its
agricultural sector in order to allow for a further liberalisation of world trade
through first the Uruguay round of negotiations, and latterly the Doha round.
The first reforms introduced under these dual pressures were named after
the then Irish European Commissioner for Agriculture, Ray MacSharry. The

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 145

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

145

‘MacSharry Reforms’ cut guaranteed prices for a number of agricultural goods,
took land out of production (to reduce surpluses), and introduced direct
payments to farmers.8 This was the first stage in decoupling payments to
farmers from production levels. It also introduced several rural development
measures, particularly to encourage environmentally sound farming. The 1999
‘Agenda 2000’ reforms (also known as Fischler I, after MacSharry’s successor
as Commissioner for Agriculture, Franz Fischler), continued the process begun
by MacSharry, and extended the use of direct payments in place of production
subsidies. It also restructured the CAP into two core pillars of agricultural expenditure. Pillar 1 covers direct payments to farmers and continuing marketrelated subsidies. Pillar 2 funds the rural development and agri-environmental
dimensions of the CAP. The most recent reforms were agreed by Agricultural
Ministers on 26th June 2003 (Fischler II), and entered into force in 2004 and
2005, with transitional periods available until 2007.9 It further reduced market
supports and ensured that direct payments to farmers, as decided at the domestic level (Single Farm Payments – SFP), would almost wholly replace price
supports. However, it also added the ‘cross-compliance’ dimension, which
made payments dependant on good farming practice. Thus Fischler II largely
completed the gradual shift in CAP financing from price support to direct
payment, and also granted Member States a greater say in how CAP funds are
spent in their countries.
Despite these reforms, CAP still has several central, controversial measures.
While the Union does have preferential trade agreements, including granting
the least developed nations in the world free access to the European market, the
EU is still essentially a protected agricultural market. Moreover, the current
CAP is still the biggest part of the EU budget, and remains expensive to the
consumer. Economists estimate that CAP costs the average European nuclear
family of four people 950 euro a year, and is the equivalent of an additional
value-added-tax on food of 15%.10 Indeed, it has been argued that the CAP
system of import tariffs and subsidies and direct payments to farmers leads to
EU consumers paying 80–100% more for their foodstuffs than could be expected
in a market-based regime.11 However, it has also ensured regular supplies of
food and a decent standard of living for farmers, as well as an aesthetically
pleasing agricultural landscape.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 146

146

DAUNIS AUERS

The future direction of CAP:
the contemporary European debate
The reforms discussed above have done little to mute the debate on the
future of CAP. Indeed, there will be a mid-term review of current CAP policies
in 2008-2009, and this is increasingly being seen as an opportunity to make
further, more substantial reforms to the CAP, as the recent reforms are increasingly regarded as unsustainable in the long-term. This is for two reasons.12
First, CAP is still incompatible with a further liberalisation of global trade (and
was a major factor behind the failure of the World Trade Organizations Doha
trade round). Second, the current CAP model remains open to continuing abuse
and corruption. However, while every Member State of the European Union is
aware of the need for reform, there is little agreement on the shape of the
future CAP. This section will bring together the main elements of this contemporary European debate. It will first discuss the trends that are driving the
need to further reform agriculture, and then focus on the potential direction of
future reforms.
Four contemporary trends are driving the need to change the existing CAP:
changing consumer preferences, trade liberalisation, rural depopulation, and a
resulting new vision of the role of farmers. First, a series of high-profile food
crises (‘mad cow’ disease, ‘foot and mouth’ disease, and avian flu to name but
three examples) have shaken consumer confidence in the food that they eat,
and has thus partly shaped perceptions on how CAP should be reformed. This
has manifested itself in growing European support for more environmentally
friendly agriculture, as well as increased public concern for animal welfare and
food security (particularly the food-chain aspect: ‘from farm to fork’). This can,
perhaps, be seen as a post-modern change in focus from the quantity, to the
quality, of food. This is enacted through less intensive farming, with more
focus on organic food products that have not utilised synthetic pesticides and
fertilisers in their production. Certainly, organic food is the fastest growing
part of the agricultural market, having grown at around 30% a year since 1998
and, because it is less efficient than more intensive farming (in terms of production), it also contributes to decreasing production surpluses.13
Second, Franz Fischler, the former European Commissioner for agriculture,
recently identified globalisation and particularly the increasing liberalisation
of trade as a key factor driving, perhaps even forcing, changes in the CAP.14

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 147

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

147

Globalisation has already shaped the first three significant waves of reform to
CAP by forcing the EU to reassess its position on agriculture in order to forward the trade liberalisation regime of the World Trade Organisation. Moreover,
there is a clear long-term trend for increasingly opening up global markets,
and especially agricultural markets, to global competition. This is not just for
neo-liberal economic efficiency (with production increasingly moving towards
the more competitive regions of the world), but also for the humanitarian and
moral dimension of opening up agricultural markets for trade from the least
developed nations.
Third, rural depopulation has long been a feature of the European countryside. However, it is particularly acute in the new Member States. For example,
in the first year and a half of accession to the EU, about 100,000 Latvians
migrated to Ireland and the United Kingdom.15 Rural regions have borne the
burnt of this labour flight all across the new Member States, both in terms of
rural worker migration abroad, and in terms of internal migration to the cities
to take up the jobs left behind by the urban dwellers that have moved westwards. Thus there is a clear need to create a framework of policies, to develop
rural infrastructure and promote local enterprises, and tackle this issue.
Fourth, there also appears to be an increasing consensus on the need to financially support farmers for their rural stewardship of the countryside. Thus the
role of farmers in rural areas is no longer merely seen in terms of agricultural
production, but as one of public service. While this has always been an implicit
motivation behind CAP, future policies are likely to explicitly tackle this issue.
The MacSharry and Fischler reforms have already partly responded to
these concerns. Indeed, the direction of these three waves of reform sketch in
the likely direction of further reform. Thus it is clear that the CAP, particularly
through decoupling and an increased role for national agricultural ministries
in the dispersal of European funds, has been increasingly heading in the direction of market liberalisation. This would then be likely to lead to a two-speed
European countryside. Productive and internationally competitive farms and
agricultural enterprises would stand next to a large number of economically
marginal producers whose major role would be to supply the public with environmental goods through stewardship of rural areas.16 This latter aspect would
clearly require continuing public financing, the only question being whether it is
seen as a European- or domestic-level public service (and thus whether it should
be funded at the European or the national, or even regional, level).

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

148

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 148

DAUNIS AUERS

Liberalisation is strongly favoured by a number of the older Member States
which have smaller, and more efficient, farming sectors that are likely to benefit from a freer market in agricultural goods. In December 2005, the British
government published its own vision of the future development of the CAP.17
The paper proposes a radical reform of the CAP (although it details the desired end-result, rather than the difficult-to-map road to getting there) to create
an, it is argued, internationally competitive European agriculture sector independent of government subsidies. Government aid (whether it be European or
domestic financed) would be re-focused to providing business training, consultancy and best-practice for a new breed of farmers-entrepeneurs. Thus these
reforms envisage farmers and agriculture becoming more mainstream participants of the market economy. It also recognised the environmental publicgood that farmers produce, and the need to recognise, and thus finance, this
good. The British model maintains a central role for the European Union, in
terms of setting, and overseeing compliance with, minimum food safety, quality,
and other regulations needed to create a genuine single market in agricultural
produce.
The recent increased role of national governments in disseminating and
structuring CAP funding, as well as the British proposal for market liberalisation of CAP both hint at a change in ‘ownership’ of agricultural policy. Thus in
2003 an influential Swedish economist argued for the re-nationalisation of the
CAP.18 It was claimed that a transfer of agricultural policy to the domestic
level, by bringing this policy arena closer to the voter, would allow politicians
to reign in the interest and lobby groups that so distort CAP at the European
level (while maintaining the common customs system and single market in
agriculture). This, the author argued, would then lead to a more rational system. However, the nationalisation of the CAP is strongly opposed by the
French government and other major net beneficiaries of agricultural funding,
and they would be likely to veto any radical reforms discussed during the
mid-term review.
In addition to market liberalisation and nationalisation, there is an emerging
consensus, clearly seen in the last decade of CAP reform, on emphasising three
distinct elements of a future CAP that would replace the current two-pillars
structure: an agricultural policy; a rural development policy; and a land management policy.19 Agricultural policy would encompass the regulations, and possibly funding mechanisms, governing agricultural policy. A rural development

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 149

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

149

policy would tackle rural depopulation by investing in rural infrastructure
(roads, schools, housing etc.) in order to maintain or attract enterprises to rural
regions. Finally, land management policy would recompense and frame activities
focused on rural stewardship as a public good. Indeed, this changing nature of
CAP is encapsulated in the emerging new vocabulary being used in the discourse. Thus agriculture is increasingly referred to as land management, farmers
as rural businesses, and the CAP as a rural or land management policy.
This article will now turn to look at Latvia and the CAP. The following
section will sketch out the development of the agricultural sector in Latvia over
the last half-century. It will then discuss four key Latvian values relating to
agriculture, and consider how they shape Latvia’s interests in the emerging
debate on the future of Latvian agriculture.

Latvian agriculture: from Soviet Union to European Union
Latvia has experienced three significant periods of agricultural reform since
the end of the Second World War. The collectivisation of agriculture during the
Soviet occupation. The privatisation of land and the nationalisation of agricultural supports during the 1990s, following the renewal of independence from
the Soviet Union. And, finally, the pre- and post-accession period to the European Union.
The Soviet era saw the rapid expropriation and collectivisation of agricultural land. By 1951, 98.4% of smallholder farms had been incorporated into collective farms.20 There were also substantial changes to the rural-urban population.
While in the inter-war period the overwhelming majority of the population
lived in rural areas (indeed, about two-thirds of the population lived and
worked on farms), this situation was reversed by the 1950s, and by 1980, 70% of
the Latvian population lived in urban areas.21 The collectivised farms were large,
averaging around 3,000–4,000 hectares (compared with the average 16 hectares
of family farms in the inter-war era).22 However, the agricultural sector in
Soviet Latvia was hugely inefficient. The World Bank described it thus:
‘The agriculture sector was characterised by a lack of market orientation or
response to consumer demand, inefficient production, irrational pricing of
inputs and outputs, and a misallocation of resources. These institutional factors,
combined with deteriorating soil fertility, the degradation of other resources

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 150

150

DAUNIS AUERS

on which agriculture depended, and the gradual obsolescence of technology
led to a decline in the area of cultivated land and slow sectoral growth. Agriculture grew by an average of less than one percent a year over 1970–90.’23
In light of this, it is perhaps unsurprising that Latvian agriculture underwent a traumatic period in the 1990s. The implementation of neo-liberal economic reforms meant that there were few subsidies available to the agricultural
sector. Thus agricultural production declined sharply in the 1990s, plunging
the depths in 1996. About one-third of agricultural land was taken out of
production, and output in 1999 was less than half the 1990 level. The biggest
decline was in animal production (66%), while the fall in crop production was
32%.24 At the same time, however, there has been a growing consolidation of
the farming sector. A decline in the total number of farms since 1994 was
accompanied by an increase in the size of the average farm from 7 hectares in
1994 to 14 hectares in 1998.25 Indeed, it has continued to grow to 22.8 in 2003,
and then 29 hectares by 2005.26
Table

Agriculture in Latvia and the European Union (2005)27
Latvia

EU-15

EU-27

64.6

3,236

4,324

Utilised agricultural area ,%

38.5%

40.6%

44%

Employed in agriculture, %

13.5%

4.3%

7.9%

Area, km2

The EU’s 2002 country report on Latvia further characterised the situation
prior to accession.28 Latvia had a negative agricultural trade balance, importing
more agricultural products than it exported. This is, perhaps, unsurprising given
that Latvia utilises less land for agriculture than the EU-15 average (with a higher
percentage of its land is given over to forestry). Also, the percentage employed
in agriculture – 13.5% – is three-times the EU-15 average, and almost twice the
EU-27 average, and hints at deep inefficiencies in the agricultural sphere.
Accession to the EU has clearly had a positive impact on the Latvian agricultural sector. The physical appearance of Latvia’s rural regions has changed
beyond all recognition in just a few years. Indeed, Latvian agricultural
producers have experienced an increase in their overall income of +5.7% in

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 151

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

151

2005, following a near doubling of income in 2004, the first year of EU membership.29 However, the impact on consumers is rather more mixed. While there
has certainly been a sharp growth in the quality and complexity of Latvian
agricultural produce in recent years, this has been accompanied by price rises.
For example, Latvia had the sharpest growth in milk prices in the European
Union in 2005 (+27.9%).30 Nevertheless, it is clear that after more than a halfcentury of agricultural inefficiency and decline, accession to the European
Union has reinvigorated the Latvian agricultural sector.

Latvian values and the future of CAP
Values are an intrinsic part of any discussion of European agriculture. A
background paper for a recent meeting of EU Ministers of Agriculture, called
to discuss the future challenges for European agriculture, asked the delegations to ponder: ‘Is the European model of agriculture a relevant and valuable
expression of the common values and principles underlying European agriculture?’31 Thus Latvia is not unique in having agriculture hold a central place
among its core values. But what are these values?
Ivars Ijabs’ broad discussion of Latvian and European values in this volume
reveals four key value dimensions that permeate the Latvian perspective on
agriculture: Nationalism (a political value), welfare, and free time (social values),
and historicism (a cultural value). However, these values need to be balanced
and placed into the context of Latvia’s national interests. In an earlier article,
Toms Rostoks and myself identified Latvia’s core interests, in the context of the
EU, to be health, wealth, and security.32 Health in order to reverse Latvia’s
disastrous population decline, as well as lengthen average life expectancy which
is among the lowest in the EU. Wealth, in order to tackle Latvia’s status as the
poorest Member State in the EU-25. Both these interests affect the quality of
life of Latvia’s inhabitants. In contrast, the third dimension, security, is a key
state interest following the many years of foreign occupation and domination
in the twentieth century and before. These values and interests need to be
considered in more detail.
First, the political value of nationalism, and the associated cultural value of
historicism. Agriculture has long been associated with nationalism. Pride in a
nation’s traditional and historic food and culinary heritage, as well as the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

152

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 152

DAUNIS AUERS

perceived unique features of a nations rural community, rooted, in Latvia’s
case, in a recent peasant past, are central to a nations self-identity. Thus agricultural production has often been a source of conflict between states. In the
1990s, Latvia had a spate of conflicts over pork and other food products with its
two Baltic neighbours of Estonia and Lithuania. In this respect, it is important
for Latvia’s identity to maintain a functioning rural sector that both produces
agricultural products for domestic consumption and export, as well as a welltended rural infrastructure. Achieving these aims also implies increasing wealth,
and resultingly health, for rural inhabitants.
The two social values of welfare and free time also tie-in closely with agriculture and rural communities. Welfare means a redistribution of the economic benefits of society. Indeed, CAP in a European context is strongly based
on the idea of sharing the economic benefits of the single market gained by
enterprises and businesses with rural communities. It also entails ensuring
that agricultural workers have a decent income and standard of living. Free
time in the Latvian case is frequently associated with rural places, whether it
be enjoying the short summer months in the countryside, or participating in
winter sports in the coldest months of the year, as successive advertisement
films made by the Latvian Institute constantly have emphasised.33
Thus a value-oriented approach to agriculture sketches in some basic Latvian interests in this policy area. First, it is important to maintain a functioning
agricultural production sector to maintain national identity, as well as ensure a
decent standard of living for people living in rural communities. At the same
time, Latvia’s small geographic size and existing close links between urban
dwellers and the countryside means that it is important that rural communities
are maintained as a public good. Moreover, this could also have an economic
rationale, as there are sizeable hopes that the number of tourists coming to
Latvia, and visiting the countryside, will rise rapidly in the coming years.
How does this feed into Latvia’s vision for the future of agriculture? The
debate on the future of CAP in Latvia has been much more muted than in the
older EU Member States. This is for several reasons. First, Latvia has only
recently joined the European Union, and as a recent member with a limited
experience, it has also only recently begun to construct its opinion on CAP.
Moreover, the CAP is such a complicated technocratic policy area, that it is not
really possible to have a detailed, constructive, popular debate on its policies and
programmes. Nevertheless, the Latvian Ministry of Agriculture has developed

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 153

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

153

a Latvian Rural Development National Strategy Plan for the 2007–2013 financial
perspective (second pillar financing).34 As the title suggests, this document
sketches out Latvia’s strategy for spending EU second pillar agricultural
financing. However, there are no further documents sketching out Latvia’s future
vision of a reformed agriculture policy. Of course, the Agricultural Ministry is
hugely overstretched dealing with the strains of administrating the CAP and
other rural policies and initiatives. However, the mid-term review of 2008–
2009 will soon be upon us, and Latvia needs to formulate its position through
a wide-ranging but informed discussion on these very important issues. After
all, membership of the EU was sold to Latvians partly on the basis of a favourable agricultural policy. Thus it is crucial that a Latvian opinion must be discussed, articulated, and ultimately heard at the European level.
Bearing in mind Latvia’s core values as regards agriculture, it is possible to
map out a very clear, but broad, Latvian perspective in the context of the
current reform debate. Essentially, in the short- to medium-term Latvia should
oppose market liberalisation and re-nationalisation of agricultural policy, while
supporting a shift in financing from first to second pillar activities in order to
prepare Latvian farmers for the seemingly inevitable long-term move to liberalise
and nationalise. The re-nationalisation of CAP is not an attractive prospect for
Latvian policy-makers. Despite a sharply growing economy, the neo-liberal
flexible economic model of low taxation and low intervention adopted by
Latvian policy makers means that in the short- and medium-term Latvia on its
own would not have the financial resources to compensate its farmers to the
extent that the older and wealthier European Union Member States could.
Nor is the increased liberaliation of the agricultural sector particularly
favourable for Latvia. Latvia’s educational system lags behind that of the older
Member States in almost every indicator except for participation. The overwhelming majority of Latvian farmers lack the skills needed to turn themselves into farmers-entrepeneurs, and it will take many years for this situation
to be reversed. Moreover, it will call for a significant change in mentality, and
thus quite some time, for farmers to accept the need for them to become more
than just the producers of agricultural products. At least Latvia already has an
existing institution, Latvijas Lauksaimniecîbas universitâte [University of Agriculture], that can take on the task of planning and executing appropriate degree,
diploma, full-time, part-time, correspondence programmes for these future
farmer-entrepeneurs.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 154

154

DAUNIS AUERS

Nevertheless, it does seem inevitable that elements of the market will be
increasingly introduced into the farming sector. As a result, it is clear that
diversification of the economy’s and commodities of the rural communities is
certainly something in Latvia’s interests. Latvia’s long harsh winters, coupled
with the lack of a grand culinary tradition, means that Latvian agriculture is
unlikely to be competitive with, for example, the Latvian or French agricultural
sectors. Thus farmers should not just be seen as the producers of food in Latvia.
They can also produce bio-fuels and other renewable sources of energy that
are being produced in many parts of the world. Moreover, there would be
great synergies through a connection between farmers and Latvian scientists
working on these renewable energy issues. This would further tie farmers into
alternative methods of farming, as well as promote the ‘knowledge society’
among rural workers, not just urban workers.
Finally, it is undoubtedly in Latvia’s interest to construct a CAP policy that
adopts a long-term perspective. The original CAP needed to be reformed after
almost three decades of operation. But only because the CAP had proved to be
so successful that it had created enormous surpluses of agricultural products,
and largely achieving its original aims. However, the 1990s agricultural reforms
in Europe have consisted of a ‘short-termism which sellotapes one remedy
onto another, creating dependency, complexity and uncertainty: young farmers
need a long term perspective’.35 This, of course, is particularly important in
Latvia, where there has been an acceleration in rural depopulation following
accession in May 2004, and where unemployment and poverty are much higher
in rural areas. A long-term, securely, and jointly, financed CAP would serve to
attract people back to farming by giving them a career-long perspective and
vision of their own roles in the rural economy, be it as food producers/traditional farmers, land managers, or working in rurally located enterprises. This
is also true for the farming sectors in the other new post-communist Member
States of the European Union.

Conclusions
To recap, in terms of agricultural policy, it is in Latvia’s short- and mediumterm interests to resist nationalisation of agricultural policy, and resist a radical
move to liberalise agriculture and ‘set it free’ into the marketplace. In the long-term,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 155

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

155

however, the opposite is true. Participation in the current second pillar activities
of CAP, along with the recent MacSharry and Fischler I and II reforms that
indirectly prepare farmers for market competition, will ultimately prepare
Latvian farmers for a liberalised agricultural market. This may also allow for
the eventual nationalisation of agricultural policy. However, it will take many
years for Latvian and other new Member State farmers to reach this level of
competitiveness.
Another challenge, of course, will be to make the Latvian voice heard in the
debate on agriculture. Latvia is not a major player in European agriculture,
having just 1.3% of EU-27 agricultural land, and 0.8% of the agricultural workforce.36 However, this does not mean that Latvia cannot attempt to punch
above its weight. In a previous article I have noted that Latvian officials have
started increasingly cooperating with their Baltic neighbours, as well as the
Nordic-6 of Denmark, Sweden, and Finland.37 Latvia’s CAP interests are certainly closely associated to those of Estonia and Lithuania, and the other seven
post-communist new Member States. In addition, the Nordic states, particularly Denmark which has an extensive farming sector, and Danish farmers
have increasing business interests in the Baltic states, could also join a bloc to
lobby for favourable reforms. In any case, it is important that the debate in
Latvia begins soon, and that all Latvians dealing with European issues and
agricultural issues participate in forming the Latvian position on agricultural
reform. While agriculture is not central to the Latvian economy, it is central to
social cohesion, leisure activities, and the way in which Latvia as a state, and
Latvians as individuals perceive themselves in both nationalist and historical
terms. As such, it is a policy area in which Latvian officials need to doggedly
defend and promote Latvia’s interests and its core values.

References and notes
1 Latvijas Fakti (2002). Sabiedrîbas attieksme pret Latvijas iespçjamo dalîbu Eiropas Savie-

nîbâ. [Public Attitudes vis-à-vis Latvia’s Membership in the European Union]. November
2002, p. 24.
2 Lapðe, Jânis (2003). Ko lauksaimnieki zaudçs neiestâjoties ES? [What Will Farmers Lose if
We Don’t Join the EU?]. www.politika.lv, 2 September 2003.
3 Miliband, David (2006). Speech given at the Wilton Park Conference on Agriculture in
Europe: What is the future? Monday 9 – Wednesday 11 October 2006. http://www.wiltonpark.
org.uk/documents/828%20Presentations/

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

156

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 156

DAUNIS AUERS

4 This article uses the term ‘European Community’ to refer to the organisation from 1957–

1992, and then ‘European Union’ to refer to the organisation after the Maastricht Treaty
on European Union.
5 Bache, Ian and Stephen George (2006). Politics in the European Union. 2nd edition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, p. 381.
6 Now Article 33 of the Consolidated Version of the Treaty Establishing the European
Community. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/en/treaties/dat/12002E/pdf/12002E_EN.pdf
7 The ‘Mansholt Plan’ proposed a fundamental reform of European agriculture through
encouraging the amalgamation of smaller farms into larger units. However, these plans
were not enacted because of hostile opposition, including sizeable demonstrations in
Brussels, from the farming community. (European Commission (1969). Memorandum on
the Reform of Agriculture in the European Economic Community. Bulletin of the
European Communities. Supplement 3/69. Brussels: European Communities)
8 Wyn Grant (1997). The Common Agricultural Policy. London: Macmillan.
9 European Commission Directorate General for Agriculture and Rural Development
(2006). CAP reform. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/capreform/index_en.htm
10 UK Department for Environment, Food and Agricultural Affairs (2005). A Vision for the
Common Agricultural Policy. www.defra.gov.uk pp. 4–5
11 Wickman, Kurt (2003). Whither the European agricultural policy? A viable reform of the CAP in
the context of an enlarged EU and the Doha development round. Timbro: Stockholm.
12 See Wickman, Kurt (2003). Whither the European agricultural policy? A viable reform of the
CAP in the context of an enlarged EU and the Doha development round. Timbro: Stockholm.
13 European Commission Directorate General for Agriculture and Rural Development
(2005). http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/qual/organic/index_en.htm
14 Fischler, Franz (2006). Providing a Future Vision for Europe’s Agriculture. Speech given
at the Wilton Park Conference on Agriculture in Europe: What is the future? Monday 9 –
Wednesday 11 October 2006. http://www.wiltonpark.org.uk/documents/828%20Presentations/
15 EUbusiness (2006) Emigration plays role in cutting Latvia jobless rate: analysts, 17/01/2006.
http://www.eubusiness.com/Employment/060117130959.qckdtn3c
16 Potter, Clive (2006). Competing narratives for the future of European agriculture: the
agri-environmental consequences of neoliberalization in the context of the Doha Round.
Geographical Journal. 172(3), pp. 190–196.
17 UK Department for Environment, Food and Agricultural Affairs (2005). A Vision for the
Common Agricultural Policy. www.defra.gov.uk
18 Wickman, Kurt (2003). Whither the European agricultural policy? A viable reform of the CAP in
the context of an enlarged EU and the Doha development round. Timbro: Stockholm.
19 See the debates and presentations at the Wilton Park Conference on Agriculture in
Europe: What is the future? Monday 9 – Wednesday 11 October 2006. http://www.wiltonpark.
org.uk/documents/828%20Presentations/
20 Smith, Graham, 1996. Latvia and the Latvians. In: Graham Smith (ed.). The nationalities
question in the post-soviet States. London: Longman, p. 151

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 157

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

157

21 Lieven, Anatol (1993). The Baltic revolution. London: Yale University Press, p. 97.
22 World Bank (1994). Latvia: Agricultural Sector Review. Report No. 12401-LV. Washington:

World Bank.
23 Ibid.
24 European Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture (2002). Agricultural Situation

in the Candidate Countries. Country Report on Latvia. Brussels: European Commission,
p. 6.
25 Ibid.
26 Benoist, Gyorgy, and Pol Marquer (2006). Farm Structure in Latvia – 2005. Brussels: Eurostat. p. 1.
27 Sources: Eurostat; Latvian Ministry of Agriculture; European Commission DirectorateGeneral for Agriculture (2002). Agricultural Situation in the Candidate Countries. Country
Report on Latvia. Brussels: European Commission.
28 European Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture (2002). Agricultural Situation
in the Candidate Countries. Country Report on Latvia. Brussels: European Commission.
29 European Union Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development (2006).
Agriculture in the European Union: Statistical and Economic Information 2005. Brussels:
European Commission, pp. 13 and 21.
30 Ibid, p. 11.
31 European Council of Ministers (2006). The European Model of Agriculture – Challenges
Ahead. A Background Paper for the Meeting of Ministers of Agriculture in Oulu, Finland
29.09.2006. SN 3098/06.
32 Auers, Daunis un Toms Rostoks (2005). Eiropas Savienîbas Nâkotnes Attîstîba. Skats no
Latvijas [The Future Development of the European Union: View from Latvia]. In: Latvija
starptautiskâs organizâcijâs 1(2) [(Latvia in International Organisations]. Rîga: Strategic
Analysis Commission, pp. 65–143.
33 See, for example, the video available on the home page of Latvijas Instituts: http://www.
li.lv/lv/?id=10
34 Latvian Ministry of Agriculture (2006). Latvian Rural Development National Strategy
Plan for the 2007–2013. http://www.zm.gov.lv
35 Miliband, David (2006). Speech given at the Wilton Park Conference on Agriculture in
Europe: What is the future? Monday 9 – Wednesday 11 October 2006. http://www.wiltonpark.
org.uk/documents/828%20Presentations/
36 European Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture (2002). Agricultural Situation
in the Candidate Countries. Country Report on Latvia. Brussels: European Commission,
p. 6.
37 Auers, Daunis (2006). Igaunija, Latvija un Lietuva Eiropas Savienîba. Vai Baltijas Valstu
Sadarbîba? Latvijas Ârpolitika un ‘Robeþu Paplaðinâðana’. 1(7) Rîga: Stratçìiskâs Analîzes Komisija, 83.–99. lpp.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 158

158

DAUNIS AUERS

Literature
Auers, D. and T. Rostoks (2005). Eiropas Savienîbas Nâkotnes Attîstîba. Skats no Latvijas
[The Future Development of the European Union: View from Latvia]. In: Latvija starptautiskâs organizâcijâs 1(2) [Latvia in International Organisations]. Rîga: Strategic
Analysis Commission, pp. 65–143.
Auers, D. (2006). Igaunija, Latvija un Lietuva Eiropas Savienîbâ. Vai Baltijas Valstu Sadarbîba? [Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in the European Union: Co-operation Among the
Baltic States?] In: Latvijas Ârpolitika un ‘Robeþu paplaðinâðana’ [Latvian Foreign Policy
and ‘Expansion of Borders’]. Rîga: Strategic Analysis Commission, pp. 83–99.
Bache, Ian and Stephen George (2006). Politics in the European Union. 2nd edition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, p. 381.
Benoist, Gyorgy, and Pol Marquer (2006). Farm Structure in Latvia – 2005. Brussels: Eurostat.
EUbusiness (2006) Emigration plays role in cutting Latvia jobless rate: analysts,
17/01/2006. http://www.eubusiness.com/Employment/060117130959.qckdtn3c
European Commission (1969). Memorandum on the Reform of Agriculture in the European
Economic Community. Bulletin of the European Communities. Supplement 3/69. Brussels: European Communities.
European Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture (2002). Agricultural Situation in
the Candidate Countries. Country Report on Latvia. Brussels: European Commission.
European Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development (2006).
Agriculture in the European Union: Statistical and Economic Information 2005. Brussels: European Commission.
European Commission Directorate General for Agriculture and Rural Development (2006).
CAP reform. http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/capreform/index_en.htm
European Council of Ministers (2006). The European Model of Agriculture – Challenges
Ahead. A Background Paper for the Meeting of Ministers of Agriculture in Oulu, Finland 29.09.2006. SN 3098/06.
Fischler, Franz (2006). Providing a Future Vision for Europe’s Agriculture. Speech given at
the Wilton Park Conference on Agriculture in Europe: What is the future? Monday 9 –
Wednesday 11 October 2006. http://www.wiltonpark.org.uk/documents/828%20Presentations/
Gaugure, Kristine (2003). Balancing Priorities: Latvia’s Agriculture and Rural Development
in a European Union Context. Rîga: Providus.
Grant, Wyn (1997). The Common Agricultural Policy. London: Macmillan.
Lapðe, J. (2003). Ko lauksaimnieki zaudçs neiestâjoties ES? [What Will Farmers Lose if We
Don’t Join the EU?]. www.politika.lv, 2 September 2003.
Latvian Ministry of Agriculture (2006). Latvian Rural Development National Strategy Plan
for the 2007–2013. http://www.zm.gov.lv
Latvijas Fakti (2002). Sabiedrîbas attieksme pret Latvijas iespçjamo dalîbu Eiropas Savienîbâ [Public Attitudes vis-à-vis Latvia’s Membership in the European Union]. November
2002, p. 24.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 159

Friend of Foe? Latvia and Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy

159

Latvijas Institûts (2006). ‘Welcome to Latvia’ film. http://www.li.lv/lv/?id=10
Lieven, Anatol (1993). The Baltic revolution. London: Yale University Press.
Miliband, David (2006). Speech given at the Wilton Park Conference on Agriculture in
Europe: What is the future? Monday 9 – Wednesday 11 October 2006. http://www.wiltonpark.
org.uk/documents/828%20Presentations/
Potter, Clive (2006). Competing narratives for the future of European agriculture: the agroenvironmental consequences of neoliberalization in the context of the Doha Round.
Geographical Journal. 172(3), pp.190–196.
Smith, Graham, 1996. Latvia and the Latvians. In: Graham Smith (ed.). The nationalities question in the post-soviet States. London: Longman.
Treaty Establishing the European Community. Consolidated Version. http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/en/treaties/dat/12002E/pdf/12002E_EN.pdf
UK Department for Environment, Food and Agricultural Affairs (2005). A Vision for the
Common Agricultural Policy. www.defra.gov.uk
Wickman, Kurt (2003). Whither the European agricultural policy? A viable reform of the CAP in
the context of an enlarged EU and the Doha development round. Stockholm: Timbro:
World Bank (1994). Latvia: Agricultural Sector Review. Report No. 12401-LV. Washington:
World Bank.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 160

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union
Introduction
Debates about immigration issues and the future of the European Union
have become increasingly important on the political agenda in recent times. In
the early 1970s, an oil supply crisis led several European countries to halt or at
least limit labour migration, and the reunification of families became the chief
reason for subsequent immigration.1 The situation has changed substantially,
however, because Europeans are gradually arriving at the conclusion that they
will have to return to primary labour migration. Rights of family reunification,
management of legal migration and control over illegal migration – all of these
are once again important issues on the European agenda.
Immigration policies in the EU are full of controversies, because they depend
both on factors of the global economy and on socio-political factors which
relate to the national interests of the EU’s Member States. In a broader sense,
the situation is also dictated by internal conflicts in terms of the continent’s
political values. The development of the EU’s immigration policy, therefore,
has involved certain steps forward which, in large part, have been dictated by
the challenges of the EU’s external environment, as well as by the globalised
economic environment of the contemporary world. At the same time, however, there have been significant retreats in the process. Political decisions have
been taken on the basis of national interests and domestic socio-political factors
in the various Member States. Trends in this regard emanate from three approaches to EU migration policy – the national approach, the intergovernmental
approach, and the supranational approach. These approaches overlap in EU
law, and they mark out the ambiguities of the process. EU migration policy
depends on the external global environment, and it has everything to do with
the EU’s foreign policy ambitions in the international arena.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 161

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

161

Processes of illegal immigration depend very much on the way in which
legal migration is handled. Illegal migration, indeed, is subordinated to legal
migration, and the process is also influenced by geopolitical considerations. In
the area of illegal migration, technical co-operation among law enforcement
institutions is of primary importance. Legal migration, by contrast, is a political
decision, which depends on the relevant country’s visions and forecasts as to
its future development. For this reason, the main focus in this paper is on legal
migration. Illegal migration is mentioned, however, because there are significant EU initiatives in this area, too.
Latvia, as an EU Member State, has extensive opportunities to become involved in the shaping of EU migration policy. First, however, it is important
for Latvia to define its national interests in the EU, so that its positions on
migration issues are consistent and, therefore, easier to defend and explain.
Latvia’s choices are limited by the fact that there are no plans related to immigration policy at the level of executive institutions and overall government
policy in Latvia. There is a lack of co-operation with professional associations,
the business environment and trade unions. Five government ministries are
involved in immigration policy in one way or another, but only in 2007 will the
first serious study of the qualitative and quantitative aspects of the labour
market and illegal employment be completed. This research is being conducted
in collaboration with the EU Social Fund.
At the same time, Latvia has fundamental advantages in comparison to the
countries of Western Europe which have been forced to deal with the consequences of their previous immigration policies. Latvia is not a target country
for immigrants at this time, so it can plan national policies in a timely way,
thinking about how these policies can be linked to EU trends. In the context of
public integration, too, the nationality policies left behind by the former Soviet
Union have created experience which may well relate to the potential immigrants in the future. Latvia can take an active position at the European level,
because EU regulations in the area of migration are only now beginning to
develop with greater velocity.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

162

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 162

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

1. European values and the challenges of immigration
1.1. Values: when the traditional encounters the new
The challenges of globalisation, the pressures of the external economic
environment and the large communities of migrants – all of these have significantly changed the EU’s role in the context of migration. Relevant issues are
becoming more and more important on the EU agenda. Migration policy at
one time was essentially the bailiwick of individual Member States, but panEuropean policy is increasingly coming to the fore at this time. Despite progress
over the last 10 years, however, there have been substantial limitations on the
effective management of migration issues at the EU level.
Both the stimuli and the limitations of migration policy stem from a conflict
between European values on the one hand and the diverse interests of EU
Member States on the other. Traditional values such as nationalism and the
welfare state often conflict with concepts such as human rights, liberalism, and
the values of individualism when migration is the issue. Progress and limitations are also seen in EU legislation which seeks to determine the Union’s
migration policies. Traditional ideas about the sovereignty of nations and
controls over national boundaries are collapsing under this policy. Changes in
one Member State affect other Member States. Mobility and the freedom of movement within certain parts of the EU create problems in terms of interior affairs
and justice – areas in which comparatively greater power still rests with Member
States, not the EU’s supranational structures. Values such as security come up
against values such as freedom. There are really no modern countries which
are completely monoethnic. Increasing human mobility and development
related to that mobility lead people to stop thinking that migrants are dangerous.
The fundamental EU idea of the free movement of individuals, in fact, contradicts the traditional idea of nation states.
European values are also increasingly being influenced by the development
of the consumer society. New value systems are appearing at the everyday level
of Europeans. The diversity of European identity has become a much-debated
topic. People have various senses of belonging (to the state, to a nationality, a
religious denomination, a profession, a lifestyle, a family, etc.).2
The value of the welfare state is very important in relation to migration
policies in Europe. Europeans have special ideas about the forms, manifestations
and importance of welfare in human lives. Welfare has always been declared

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 163

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

163

to be a positive value, one which allows people to live lives of full value. Europe
has historically been dominated by the view that very unevenly distributed
welfare is no proper welfare. This assumption, to be sure, has been far from
reality at times, but ‘ideal Europeans’ will not feel happy if they are privately
rich, but all around them there is nothing but poverty.3 This perception is an
important prerequisite for the culture of human rights which prevails in Europe.
From the perspective of value-perception in Western Europe, a welfare State
helps people. It guarantees social and cultural survival, replacing income with
social aid, unemployment benefits or early pensions. If the market does not
ensure sufficient income from work, the state ensures sufficient income on its
own. Over the course of time, this has created a situation in which social support policies no longer promote economic initiative to undertake risk and to
compete with others.
Welfare in Western Europe has become a problem exacerbated both by the
collapse of the Iron Curtain and by the opening up of China. Fully 28% of
humanity suddenly flooded into the Western market system. Integration of
the ‘Asian tiger economies’ proved to be quite difficult in the 1970s and 1980s.
Integration of these economies provided profits to most countries engaged in
the global trading system, but it also created vast problems for the West because
of intensively diminishing pressure on the salaries of unqualified labour. Financial capital and direct investments have flowed from West to East, Western
economies have been forced to specialise in highly qualified and capital-intensive manufacturing which creates fewer jobs, and unqualified immigrants
have been making their way toward the West.
1.2. The future of the EU in the area of immigration
Scenarios as to the future of the EU in the area of immigration must be
analysed in the context of the diverse approaches which Member States and
EU institutions take toward this issue. There are three major approaches to
immigration policy in the EU – the national, the intergovernmental and the
supranational approach. All three approaches have been put to the test, and
the development of EU policy in this regard depends on the dominant approach. The development of European policy indicates that all three approaches
are in place as migration issues are being handled. Most often, however, the
intergovernmental approach dominates.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

164

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 164

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

The national approach is based on emotional and cultural perceptions and
on sentiments of a national identity. The approach is based on the idea that EU
Member States shape their own national policies, and not all countries are
obliged to allow aliens to cross their borders. EU policy has developed considerably, but this approach has been quite powerful irrespective of the level of EU
integration. The national approach is seen, for instance, in those EU Member
States which have closed their labour markets to people from newly admitted
EU Member States. Others insist that the focus of attention in migration policy
must be exclusively on illegal migration. Supporters of the national approach
feel that investments in the countries of origin of migrants will eventually reduce
the negative socio-political consequences of migration. France, Germany, Austria
and the Netherlands are all supporters of this particular approach. The
national approach is also seen in EU legislation. In the area of immigration,
Member States have extensive rights to define their own criteria, on the basis
of their own national interests.
Many Europeans think that the flow of immigrants must be limited even
though birth rates on the continent are very low, and there are increasing concerns about a lack of workers. ‘Europe cannot accept everyone who believes
this to be El Dorado,’ says President of France and former French Interior
Minister Nicolas Sarkozy.4 The EU commissioner for external affairs, Benita
Ferrero-Waldner, told the Moroccan newspaper Le Matin that the flow of political and economic refugees could be reduced if people’s lives were improved
in Africa. ‘We must not concentrate the discussion only on security issues. We
must not ignore the fundamental causes of the migration movement – poverty
and insecurity,’ she said.5 These statements clearly reflect the national approach
in the shaping of EU policy. Policies that are based on the national approach
emanate from traditional values which are of key importance of domestic
balance in the various Member States.
The intergovernmental approach, meanwhile, is based on compromises
which can be agreed by Member State governments so as to ensure the proper
functioning of EU interests. Pragmatism and functionality are the keywords
here. Immigration policies in the EU, according to this approach, are based
exclusively on policies upon which all parties can agree at a specific moment
in time. The Hague Programme is an example of vast and diverse approach to
its policy directions.6 The intergovernmental approach usually seeks the middle
way among various political offers. Sometimes it can do nothing but seek the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 165

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

165

lowest common denominator upon which all participants in the specific debate
can agree. The main problem, of course, is that problems often develop far more
swiftly than policies do. These are reactive and cumbersome policies, and their
effectiveness suffers as a result of this.
EU policy since the late 1990s has largely been based on the principles of the
intergovernmental approach. Immigration is an ongoing process of the future
of European society. If the flow of immigrants to the EU is managed appropriately, Member States can gain significant economic, cultural and other benefits from the process. This helps to facilitate various processes in Europe, and
strengthens the European role in the world. Effective migration management
in the European Union, in other words, serves everyone’s interests.7
Key aspects of managing migration include not just the fight against illegal
migration, including the process of human trafficking, but also the successful
integration of legal migrants. In the EU as a whole, it is important to make sure
that Member States preserve and develop societies in which newly arrived persons
feel comfortable, ones in which there is mutual understanding and acceptance.
Segregation and discrimination cause discomfort in one part of society, pushing
policies back toward the national approach. France provides us with an example
of the types of internal conflicts which can emerge as a result of this.
The future of the EU in the field of migration depends on two fundamental
scenarios in which the interests of economic development either dominate
value conflicts or are subordinated to those conflicts. The outer world can
significantly influence the pace at which migration policies are developed. The
development of the EU depends in part on how Member States, in dealing
with economic issues, manage to control legal migration, on the way in which
citizens of third countries are integrated so as to reduce the threat of social
discrimination, on how shifts in demographic situations are managed so that
there can be increased reliance on the local labour force, and on the extent to
which scientific technologies and innovations are brought to bear in pursuit of
economic progress.
The supranational approach is an economically rational (mercantile) reaction
to the demand in Europe for labour force. This approach ignores the domestic
policies and identities of Member States. It is based on the EU’s macroeconomic needs and on international competition. The supranational approach is
the result of how the external environment and the process of globalisation
have affected the EU.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

166

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 166

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

Among politicians who defend this idea, Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt is a star. He believes that an integrated and federal ‘United States of
Europe’ could become a powerful force in the globalised world, that this would
facilitate economic development in Europe, and that it would allow Europe to
fight more effectively against organised crime. Verhofstadt has analysed the
worries of EU citizens at this time and pointed first and foremost to concerns
about globalisation and international crime. This, he has written, must not lead
to a call for ‘less Europe.’8
Pointing to public opinion surveys conducted by the European Commission’s Eurobarometer organisation, Verhofstadt has argued that ‘people do not
want less Europe, they want a different Europe.’ The Belgian politician feels that
the concerns of citizens can be addressed through a more deeply integrated
Europe, one which could be a power in the globalised world so as to stimulate
the European economy, ensure better economic co-ordination, and fight against
organised crime, as well. Verhofstadt has called for a ‘social and economic
government of Europe,’ one that would set minimal and maximal standards
on issues such as flexibility in the labour market, retirement age, worker protection, etc.9
Similar ideas have been expressed by the International Organisation for
Migration. ‘The EU must open its doors more widely to immigration if it wishes
to improve its economy,’ says the IOM executive director, Brunson McKinley.10
The lack of legal immigration opportunities to countries in the EU which are
suffering from an aging population ‘has a deleterious effect on economic growth
in Europe,’ he adds. ‘If the only thing that you do is introduce increasingly
effective control systems [against illegal immigrants] while, at the same time,
not opening up channels for legal immigration in places where that is necessary, you will find yourself in difficulties. [..] Without migration, you will not
be able to fill important jobs and maintain your economic activities.’ McKinley
particularly points to such sectors as child care and care for senior citizens.
McKinley has said that he is not criticising the EU’s attack against illegal
immigration, but he does feel that the Union must draft policies related to
economic migration. The IOM director argues that the EU could establish
unified quotas for categories of workers such as builders. In other categories,
supply and demand could be regulated by the market. McKinley speaks positively of the European Commission’s efforts to launch debates about the matter. The Commission wants to approve special rules to attract highly qualified

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 167

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

167

employees from outside the Union and to make it easier for migrants to keep
seasonal jobs.11

2. Situation analysis and risk factors
2.1. Economic factors which have an effect on immigration
The need for immigration is largely due to economic issues which are based
on the EU’s macroeconomic trends. Nearly 40% of economic growth in the
world over the next 15 years will occur in China and India (27% and 12%
respectively), according to a recent study by the Economist Intelligence Unit
(EIU). It forecasts that China’s economy will catch up with the US economy by
2020, and the share of the Asian economy in global GDP, when calculated on
the basis of purchasing power parity, will have increased from 35% in 2006 to
43% in 2020. The EIU also forecasts economic growth in the USA of nearly 3%
a year, while the EU, according to the researchers, should experience growth
of approximately 2.1% per year.12
Over the next few years the EU economy will also grow through the process
of territorial expansion. The Union may grow to more than 30 countries, but
average income levels in the enlarged EU in the year 2010 will be just at 56% of
the US level. Analysts also point that countries with low costs will maintain
their wage advantages in the global labour market. The average wage in China
is just 5% of the US and EU level at this time, but by 2020 it will rise to 15% of
that level. This means that labour-intensive manufacturing will continue to be
moved to the countries with lower labour costs, but the EIU says that fears of
the disappearance of industries in the West are premature.13
Welfare in Europe is also hindered by shadow economies, which represent
around 16% of the EU’s overall economy.14 Illegal migration supports illegal
employment and discrimination. Without integration, immigrants from the
periphery are subject to exploitation. Discrimination facilitates alienation among
immigration, and this can seriously threaten social environment, security and
political systems. Insufficient integration and excessive discrimination create
an ideological basis for radical political actors in the left and the right wing,
and that can threaten overall security.
It is predicted that between 2010 and 2030, the number of people of working
age in the 25 countries which were Member States until the beginning of 2007

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

168

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 168

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

will decline by 20 million. The European Commission adds that after 2025,
immigration will no longer compensate for the natural decline in population
numbers. Last year the total number of immigrants was 1.85 million – 80% of
total population growth in the EU.15
The European Commission has also predicted that by 2020, the EU will lack
20.8 million people of working age – 6.8% of the total population. The Commission has warned that the population of the EU will decline from 469.5 million
in 2050 to 468.7 million in 2030. In the United States, by comparison, population
numbers are expected to increase by 25.6% between 2000 and 2025. ‘These
demographic changes will significantly affect our wealth, standard of living
and generational relationships. Modern Europe has never experienced economic
growth without increased birth rates,’ says a European Commission report.16
Substantial numbers of immigrants entered Europe between 1989 and 1998.
Each year some 1.2 million people arrive legally in the EU, and they are joined
by perhaps 500,000 illegal migrants. For many European countries, this influx
of migrants in the 1990s was quite a shock. The Economist cites Greece as an
example of this. A census in 2001 found that the number of residents had increased by a full million (the total population of Greece is 11 million). Only
40,000 of these people were the result of natural growth rates. This movement
of people certainly creates benefits, and not for the migrants alone. The Economist has concluded that ‘immigrants, unlike local residents, are prepared to
move to locations where there is a lack of labour, thus relieving the situation in
places where this is a problem.’17
The EU receives approximately 1.5 million immigrants a year at this time.
Europe, indeed, is the most popular destination for émigrés, among whom
32.1% want to travel to the continent, while 23.4% choose the United States. It
appears, however, that America is becoming more popular. The number of
immigrants in the USA increased by 48% between 1990 and 2004, while the
increase in Europe during the same time was 15.8%. UN calculations indicate
that by 2050, some two million people each year will try to move from impoverished countries to wealthy ones. It is expected that the United States will
receive 1.26 million of these migrants, Europe will be the destination for 650,000,
and Australia and New Zealand will receive 90,000. Within Europe, 352,000
migrants will arrive in Western Europe, 145,000 will end up in Southern
Europe, and 156,000 will choose Scandinavia as their destination.18

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 169

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

169

2.2. Political factors which have an effect on immigration
Despite rational ideas about the economic advantages of immigration, the
fact is that it creates social, ethnic and political problems in Europe. These
relates both to ethnic relations and to the identity of multicultural societies. In
some Western European countries, generations of immigrants have largely
been ignored as members of society. Segregation of immigrant communities
has led to alienation in society, and this is increasingly manifested through the
activities of radical political groups. Intolerance toward immigrants has increased in many parts of Europe. Radically right-wing parties have achieved
certain success in the Netherlands, Austria, Denmark, France, the eastern sections
of Germany, Slovakia, and elsewhere. In all cases, their activism is closely linked
to the effects of migration on ethnic relations. These issues have become particularly fraught since the international terrorist acts which have occurred
since 2000 and the steps which have been taken in response to those.
Great Britain received hundreds of thousands of immigrants from Eastern
Europe during the first two years after EU enlargement in 2004, and that is a
country in which there have been increasing debates about the need to put the
brakes on this influx of guest workers. Public opinion surveys call for much
stricter immigration policies, and this is an issue which has become particularly
important since it became clear that Bulgaria and Romania would join the EU
at the beginning of 2007.
The British government insists that the guest workers promote economic
development, but the British people are more likely to worry about the negative
consequences of immigration. Immigrants are accused of pushing poorly qualified local residents out of the labour market, for instance. Local government
officials in Britain warn that the influx of immigrants hampers public services
for local residents. Local governments are forced to spend increasing sums of
money on hospitals and schools. Greater numbers of English language teachers
must be hired, for example, to teach the children of émigrés. The Sunday Times
published a survey which showed that 77% of respondents would like strict
limits on number of immigrants who are allowed to enter Great Britain each
year.19
The extreme right wing of European politics always engages in racism and
in attempts to use immigration for political purposes. Parties and movements
of this kind include Lega Nord in Italy, Vlaams Blok in Belgium, the National

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

170

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 170

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

Front of Jean Marie Le Pen in France, etc. These movements are joined together
by a dislike of immigrants and by efforts to simplify policies which are aimed
at controlling such people.
Aging populations and increasingly open borders in Europe have increased
racial segregation. Centre-left and centre-right parties have tried to ignore these
problems in the vain hope that they will resolve themselves. The fact is that
there have been two contradictory trends in many European countries and in
the EU in the last several years. Intolerance is on the rise vis-à-vis immigrants
and various minorities – Asians, Africans, the Roma, or all immigrants. In
reaction to this, some countries such as Ireland and Great Britain have introduced stricter rules of naturalisation and citizenship. On the other hand, some
countries and international institutions (the United Nations, the Council of
Europe, the International Labour Organisation) are seeking new legal and public
mechanisms to reduce trends of intolerance. Public opinion surveys suggest
that many European voters feel threatened and unprotected.20 People believe
that the European social model has exchanged lower economic growth for
greater social protections and less in the way of risk. It is clear what these
people want – less immigration, a harsher attack against crime, greater economic opportunities, but also greater protection against economic risks and
international competition.21

3. Regulation of immigration in the EU
3.1. The development of regulative framework
The European Union was established with the goal of promoting internal
migration among European countries so as to prevent labour shortages in
certain sectors of the economy. The initial approach to the free movement
rights, in other words, was based exclusively on economic considerations, and
the process affected economically active citizens – workers, service providers
and businesspeople. Migration within the EU, however, was not particularly
extensive, because the citizens of developed countries saw little or no reason
to move to another country. In turn, the right to free movement of young
people, particularly students, was not harmonised throughout the EU. At the
same time, migration from countries outside the EU was always significant in
absolute numbers.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 171

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

171

External migration appeared on the European Union’s agenda in 1985, when
agreement was reached on the introduction of mutual consultations concerning migration policies related to people from third countries.22 Some Member
States appealed the decision before the European Court of Justice, arguing that
the Community (Communities at that time) did not have any competence in
migration issues. The Court ruled against the petitioners, stating that Article
137 of the Treaty establishing the European Community (Article 118 before approval of the Amsterdam Treaty) created the disputed competence because of
the fact that migration policies vis-à-vis non-member countries had an effect on
the social policies of the European Community.23 Since 1985, in other words,
there have been ongoing conflicts in the European Union between those who
try to protect sovereignty which should permit almost absolute freedom with
respect to rules that are related to foreigners, and those supporting the need to
create exceptions to this freedom of action in pursuit to the ability of the
‘European project’ to ensure functional capacity of the European Union.24
The Schengen agreement offers a vivid illustration of these conflicts. The
agreement emerged from disagreements among Member States. The so-called
core States of the EU – France, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands – decided to establish a common space without borders in 1985. An
implementation agreement on introducing the Schengen requirements followed in 1990.25 Another five years passed before all EU Member States except
for Great Britain and Ireland acceded to the treaty.
Even as the Schengen regime was being developed, there were also changes
in other EU processes related to the free movement of individuals. In 1990, the
European Commission issued three major directives to address the right of free
movement of students, pensioners and people who can support themselves.26
In 1992, the concept of EU citizenship was instituted in the Maastricht Treaty.
The concept of citizenship did not have any specific content at first, and this is
seen as an evolutionary, not a revolutionary concept. According to Joseph
Weiler, a well-known scholar of EU law, the concept of EU citizenship will
change not only because the understanding of State and nation is changing,
but also, perhaps, because we are changing our self-understanding and our
identity.27 The Maastricht Treaty also established the so-called Third Pillar, which
speaks to inter alia co-operation among Member States in the area of migration.
The pillar allowed Member States to take unanimous decisions on joint activities
and to conclude international treaties.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

172

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 172

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

Amendments to the Amsterdam Treaty were the next key impulse for the
further development of migration law in the EU. The amendments stated that
the section of the EU Treaty which spoke to common policies in the area of
immigration, asylum and visas was to be moved from the Third Pillar to the
First Pillar – the European Community. The new competence entitled the Community inter alia to set regulation for legal and illegal migration, border crossing,
refugees and asylum seekers.28 This facilitated integration of the Schengen acquis
in EU law. Thus, migration policies acquired an EU dimension.
It was decided that steps related to migration were to be taken within five
years after approval of the Amsterdam Treaty. Decisions on secondary acts
required unanimous decisions by the Council of Ministers after consultations
with the European Parliament. Qualified majority voting was approved only
in relation to the visa regime (paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 67 of the Treaty
establishing the European Community), and limited cases of co-decision procedure were defined in paragraph 4 of Article 67 of the Treaty. The five-year term
was not applied to any decisions related to the rights of refugees, long-term
residents and their family members (Paragraphs 2(b), 3(a) and 4 of Article 63
of the Treaty). Since the Nice Treaty, with a few exceptions, all decisions must
be taken on the basis of Article 251 of the Treaty establishing the European
Community, i.e., co-decision procedure. Despite this liberalisation of the decisionmaking process, the role of the Court in migration issues remained limited.
Article 68 of the Treaty establishing the European Community provides that
only the highest-level courts in Member States can request the Court of Justice
for a preliminary ruling. Alternatively, the Council, the European Commission
or a Member State can dispute the legality of an act that has been approved.
Therefore, Member States rejected a doctrinal proposition made even before
the Amsterdam Treaty was approved – that third country nationals who had
lived in the EU for five years should be granted EU citizenship. Instead,
Member States considered that the status of the third country nationals should
be strengthened. This strategy of the European Community was confirmed in
the Tampere Programme which was adopted in 1999. It stated that third country
nationals should be granted additional rights even as the status of EU citizenship was strengthened. The main goal was to achieve so-called ‘near-equality’
between EU citizens and third country nationals.
After the Tampere meeting, the European Commission began to work on legal
acts in almost all areas of immigration and asylum rights. A special ‘scoreboard’

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 173

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

173

was established.29 The Commission did effective work, but the European Council
hindered several of its initiatives. This conflict grew harsher and harsher until
a meeting of the European Council in Seville in 2002, when representatives of
conservative Member States took the upper hand, and the development of immigration rights basically ground to a halt. This was also seen in national
legislation. Several countries amended their immigration laws substantially –
Italy, Great Britain, the Netherlands, Germany, Spain, Greece and Portugal at
first, and other countries afterward. The threat of international terrorism after
the terrorist acts of September 11, 2001, also had a major effect on proceedings
in this area.30
A new compromise has been reached by adopting the Hague Programme,
which speaks to the strengthening of freedom, security and justice in the European Union between 2005 and 2009. This serves as the foundation for further
development in the area of migration. The new programme is a continuation
of the Tampere Programme of 1999. The political goal is to ensure co-ordination
among Member States vis-à-vis issues of migration and facilitation of the integration of legal migrants. The requirements of the programme are specified in
an Action plan which was approved by the European Commission and then,
on June 2, 2005, by the European Council. A series of documents have been
prepared in the context of this process.31 This means a de facto return to the
Tampere position, because economic considerations at the European level have
taken the upper hand over conservative and nationalist ideas.
Migration policies in the EU have been incrementally liberal so far, with
rises and falls. The policies have never included any final goal to be achieved
which would allow the policy process to be completed in Europe. That is
mainly because migration policies largely remain national issues. One of the
fundamental principles of international law is that no country is obliged to
admit the citizens of other countries into its territory. It is only recently that
international human rights have begun to provide exceptions to that principle;
EU has also introduced a special procedure vis-à-vis third country nationals
who are resident in the EU.
3.2. The content of immigration law
This section is focused on existing regulations and initiatives related to
legal and illegal migration in the European Union, focusing also on the main
sources of the law which define the rights of third country nationals in the EU.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

174

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 174

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

In the area of legal and illegal migration, the European Commission has
issued a whole series of communications, announcements, strategies and
studies.32 The Commission is trying to fulfil the functions that were entrusted
to it in the Treaty establishing the European Community while simultaneously
monitoring the cautious reactions of Member States. This means that the documents which have been prepared by the Commission are often quite difficult
to understand. It is hard to trace the way in which they are developed so that a
general view of the situation in the acquis communautaire can be established.
The starting point for Community policy is the calculation by the European
Commission that there will be a rapid shrinkage in the EU’s labour force after
the year 2010. The Commission has stated that between 2010 and 2030, the EU
will lose approximately 20 million workers.33
The Commission has asked for an open co-ordinated procedure in dealing
with migration issues so as to define common goals at the European level. This
co-operation relates to issues such as control over migration, the rights and
integration of third country nationals, a common asylum policy, and co-operation
with the countries of origin of migrants from outside the EU.34
First of all, the principle of ‘Community preference’ will be in place when it
comes to legal migration. Advantage in the field of employment will be given to
EU citizens and to those third country nationals who are permanent residents of the
Member States and are a part of the legal labour force. The Commission has recommended that the next group could be made up of third country nationals
who are not permanent residents in the EU but are job-seekers.35 When it comes to
the further involvement of third country nationals in the EU labour market, it is important to engage in a new debate about the Commission’s proposals for a Council
Directive on the conditions of entry and residence of third country nationals for
the purpose of paid employment and self-employed economic activities.36 The
Council gave only first reading consideration to that proposal at one time, but no
further development has followed since then. The Commission’s initiatives in the
area of legal migration speak to long-term and multiple entry visas for economic
migrants, as well as the establishment of a unified work permit for all of the EU’s
Member States. There are also plans to issue special permits to seasonal workers
from non-EU countries. These would allow such people to spend a certain amount
of time in the EU each year, and they would be issued for a five-year period.
The Council has adopted decision to implement a procedure of mutual exchange of information vis-à-vis steps which Member States have taken in relation

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 175

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

175

to asylum rights and migration.37 This initiative represents a continuation of an
initial decision on information exchange back in 1985, and the aim is to ensure
that no individual Member State takes decisions which could have an effect on
other Member States. This can be considered as a reaction to Spain’s decision
to legalise its migrants in 2005 which was harshly criticised by Germany and
the Netherlands.
Second, it has been emphasised that one of the most important aspects of
the legal migration is the integration of third country nationals. At a meeting
of the European Council at Saloniki in June 2003, it was decided that work
must begin on common principles related to integration policy. The Commission has prepared a special programme to promote integration based on the
Hague Programme and the conclusions were presented by the Council on
Judicial and Internal Affairs on November 19, 2004, as well as Common fundamental principles of integration.38 Apart from that, the programme stressed the
role of fundamental values, the process of mutual acceptance among migrants
and EU citizens, the importance of education and knowledge of the language,
history and institutions of the country of residence, the Commission has also
expanded the traditional understanding of integration. It has particularly
emphasised, for instance, the need to eliminate discrimination in the area of
employment, ensuring access to institutions, services and goods and guaranteeing the participation of immigrants in democratic processes and integration
policies. The Commission has also planned to publish a handbook on integration
which will speak to information exchange and guidelines for active integration
policy.39 References to integration processes and rules which are mandatory
for third country nationals can be found in all new directives that have been
adopted in the context of Chapter IV of the Treaty of the European Community. Member States retain freedom of action in demanding that people
from other countries merge into the relevant society by learning the national
language, culture and history. The EU, however, can also demand that Member
States avoid any discriminatory norms vis-à-vis third-country nationals in the
labour market.
Third, the central issue related to border crossings, visas and illegal migration is the Schengen Information System, which has been delayed for technological reasons. Also important is joining Schengen regime by new Member
States. When it comes to border guard facilities, the FRONTEX agency for
managing operative co-operation on external borders has been in place since

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

176

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 176

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

2005. Its job is not to monitor borders, but instead to provide co-ordination and
risk management.40 This will make it possible to mobilise EU Member State
forces to strengthen border control processes in case of crises.
A great deal of work has been done to form a common system of asylum.
Since 1999, the Commission has issued 11 communications on various aspects
of asylum and refugee issues. Four directives and three regulations have been
adopted.41 These documents speak to harmonisation of the way in which refugee status is granted, specification of the responsible country, and minimum
standards related to reception conditions for asylum seekers. The plan is to
complete work on this common system by the year 2010.
The struggle against illegal migration is an important aspect of EU policy,
all the more so because there are no border controls among the Schengen
countries. Illegal migration, therefore, affects nearly all of the EU’s Member
States. In 2001, the Commission distributed recommendations on how to fight
against illegal migration.42 In 2005, the Commission submitted a package of
draft directives to the Council and Parliament with respect to the fight against
illegal migration, and these were drafted on the basis of the initial proposals,
as well as the Hague Programme.43 It must be admitted that there is greater
unanimity among Member States with respect to the battle against illegal
migration, expulsion and security procedures, than there is in the area of legal
migration and asylum policy.44 It can be predicted, therefore, that strict criteria
in this sector will be introduced quite quickly. In addition, the Commission
and Council are also working on various aspects of facilitation of voluntary
repatriation of illegal migrants, as well as on human trafficking issues.
Fourth and finally, the EU is also planning to activate co-operation with
other countries, particularly in terms of developmental co-operation. This will
involve issues such as human rights, institutional issues and good governance,
migration, asylum rights, terrorism, organised crime and border management.45
Particular attention in this regard is devoted to the EU’s neighbourhood policy,
as well as to the countries of North Africa.46 In parallel, there are ongoing
negotiations and readmission agreements concluded with third countries,
including Russia and Ukraine.47 The Council’s new policy on international agreements states that each agreement should contain reference to readmission
clause. EU policy vis-à-vis other countries, therefore, is dual. It speaks to developmental co-operation to improve living conditions in those countries so as to
reduce the flow of illegal migrants, but it also refers to the need for countries to

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 177

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

177

accept the return of illegal migrants. This leads to guarantees as to further
development of controlled migration policies.
This brief review does not list all acts and initiatives, but it does demonstrate
the thorough approach which the EU is taking toward migration issues, looking
also at general trends in this area. At the EU level, it is clearly understood that
migration is necessary, but far greater unanimity among Member States is seen
in the area of illegal, as opposed to legal migration. In the latter area, it takes
longer to reach agreement on positions and specific documents. As the EU
forms its common internal area, it should remember that migration policies
vis-à-vis third States must also be unified. Right now, it is impossible to avoid
crises which affect just a few countries, because the Member States are operating
on the basis of the principle of ‘nesting dishes’. This, in turn, demands that
sensitive aspects of migration be transferred to the EU’s competence.
In relation to the rights of third country nationals the instruments which
have a direct effect both on their rights and on the indirect opportunities
which they can enjoy should be identified. The first opportunity to gain rights
is to become a citizen in an EU Member State. In the Micheletti case, for
instance, the Court ruled that it is of key importance for the relevant country to
recognise the individual as a citizen.48 Citizenship in another EU country cannot
be disputed even if the person has never lived in the EU and does not have
any links with his or her country of citizenship. The Micheletti case was one in
which a person who held both Italian and Argentinian citizenship won the
rights of EU citizenship. Micheletti was a doctor who travelled from Argentina
to Spain to launch his practice.
Once a person is an EU citizen, family members receive the right of residency. Here we can refer to the Chen case,49 in which a Chinese couple living in
Britain decided that their daughter would be born in Ireland, in which the
absolute ius soli principle was in place at that time. The baby automatically
became a citizen of Ireland and the EU. The daughter’s EU citizenship, in turn,
meant that her parents had the right of residency in the EU. Similarly, the case
called R. and Baumbast 50 allowed a US citizen to gain the right of residency in
Great Britain. She was divorced from an EU citizen and was raising his children,
who were also EU citizens.
The right of the family members of EU citizens to live in the EU will
improve thanks to Directive 2004/38/EC, on the right of citizens of the Union
to move and reside freely within the Member States. Implementation of the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

178

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 178

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

directive’s requirements ended on April 26, 2006.51 So far, the European Court
of Justice has heard several cases related to third country nationals who are
family members of EU Citizens. The Court has based its rulings on Article 8 of the
European Convention of Human Rights and produced a liberal interpretation
of the relevant requirements.52 The process of integration in Europe has entered
a new phase right now, and migration is based on citizenship, not economic
activity. In line with this development family members of EU citizens are gaining more distinct status. Basically, the directive confirms the rulings of the
European Court of Justice when it comes to the rights of third country nationals.
Another opportunity for third country nationals to achieve legal residency
in the EU is to be employed by a service provider from an EU Member State or
some third State.53 This short-term residency depends on the specific situation
with the individual’s employment in specific company, but the fact is that such
people may continue to live in the EU, whether legally or illegally. One must
also mention the rights of the third country nationals which are stated in the
EU’s Association Agreements. Therefore, although the new rules of the EU speak
to at least some efforts to harmonise the process, in certain cases more farreaching international agreements will be in place. It is hard to identify all of
the possible cases, but it is clear that Turkey’s agreement with the EU ensures a
more favourable regime for the citizens of Turkey than that which is identified
in the standards of the new directives owing partially to the decisions of the
relevant Association Council.54
As a result of amendments to the Amsterdam Treaty, the Council has so far
approved four fundamentally important directives with reference to third
country nationals and their status and rights. The two which are most allencompassing are Directive 2003/86/EC on the right of family reunification
(implemented as of October 3, 2005), and 2003/109/EC on the status of third
country nationals who are long-term residents (January 23, 2006).55 The directives
speak to the status of people who do not want to become citizens of an EU
Member State either because the laws of their home country do not permit this
or because it would interfere with their return to the country of origin for a
shorter or longer period of time. The directives will grant these people free
movement in the EU, albeit with limitations. This was not even guaranteed by
Association Agreements. Finally, family reunification is now defined as a right
in and of itself, not as an exception to migration rules in the context of human
rights.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 179

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

179

Directive 2003/109/EC implements the commitment defined in the Tampere Programme – bringing the status of third country nationals closer to that
of EU citizens. The directive was approved after a great deal of compromise,
and several of its norms allow Member States wide margin of appreciation.
Before non-nationals can receive their status, they must satisfy a series of
requirements which have been formulated quite generally – stable and regular
income which is sufficient to maintain himself/herself without burdening
social assistance system of the Member State; sickness insurance; an appropriate accommodation; valid documents and registered and regular residency in
the Member State for at least the previous five years. The right of Member
States to demand that third country nations observe national rules related to
integration is among the most controversial aspects of the directive. The norm
is so general that Member States have carte blanche rights in this particular
regard.56 The directive also does not include so-called ‘standstill clauses’ which
demand that Member States must not worsen the situation of third country
nationals. From the perspective of material rights, the central element of the
directive is Article 11, which speaks to equal treatment of third country nationals and Member State citizens in areas such as access to the labour market,
work conditions, availability of education, recognition of diplomas and qualifications and social assistance. The directive also specifies those cases in which
third country nationals have the right of movement in the EU.
In this sense the directive observes the ‘Community preference’ principle,
which says that Member States should give preference to EU citizens and
others who already reside in the country, only then allowing non-Member
State citizens to arrive from other EU Member States. The directive allows
third country nationals to access the labour market in the entire EU, but the
fact is that those opportunities are quite circumscribed. It is only in the area of
social security that everyone’s rights are the same. This is the result of
Regulation 859/2003, which offers the same social security advantages to third
country residents as to EU citizens – rights defined in Regulations 1408/71
and 574/72. Third country nationals also are subject to two non-discrimination directives – 2004/43/EC57 and 2000/78/EC.58 The effectiveness with
which the requirements of these directives will be implemented depends in
large part on how certain of its Articles will be interpreted as well international
obligations of the Member States in the context of other organisations such as
the International Labour Organisation and the Council of Europe. In certain

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

180

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 180

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

cases, standards related to specific rights are higher in those organisations than
in the EU.
Directive 2003/86 liberalises and makes clearer the process of family reunification while also strengthening the duty of third country nationals to observe
integration rules or procedures.59 The directive applies to those third country
nationals who have received residency permits in the EU which are valid for
one or more years, provided that they have the reasonable prospects to obtain
a permanent residency permit and that their family members are third country
nationals. This opens the possibility for Member States to grant residency
permits for periods such as nine months, thus excluding some third country
nationals from the scope of the directive. Family members are spouses, minor
children of both spouses, including children who have been adopted. In spite
of the fact that Member States have quite a bit of freedom in how all of these
rules are applied, the European Court of Justice recently ruled that the directive
is fully in line with human rights and that in implementing it, Member States
must take into account such human rights instruments as the European Convention on Human Rights, the Convention on Children’s Rights, and the EU
Charter of Fundamental Rights.60 In accordance with the directive, the maximum amount of time which a Member State can define before family reunification is permitted is two years. A third country national who asks for family
reunification should prove that he or she has sufficiently good accommodation,
health insurance and stable and regular income to provide for himself or herself and his or her family.61 Even if these requirements are satisfied Member
States can refuse the entry of family members who threaten public security,
order or health, but they cannot automatically do so just because someone is
on the Schengen countries’ list of undesirables. The European Court of Justice
has ruled that even if someone is on that list, the relevant Member State must
reassess the level of threat.62 The directive, inter alia, ensures the family’s
rights to education, employment, entrepreneurship, additional training and
retraining.
There are also several sector directives which have recently been adopted –
directive 2005/71/EC63 applies specifically to scientists. It facilitates admission
of the third country nationals to the EU for the purposes of scientific research.
This directive is closely linked to the goals of the Lisbon Strategy, which says
that by 2010, the European economy must be more competitive and knowledge-based.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 181

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

181

Council Directive 2004/114/EC, which was addopted on December 13,
2004, speaks to the admission of third country nationals for the purposes of
studies, student exchanges, internships, unpaid apprenticeships, or volunteer
work.64 This directive applies only to those students who do not qualify under
the terms of other directives. Students must have valid documents, parental
permission if they are minors, health insurance and enough money for tuition.
They must not constitute threat to public security, public order or public health.
This is a directive which seeks to harmonise rules, but relevant doctrine criticises
the sector-based and limited approach. Doctrine also criticises the fact that
family members are not allowed to join the students who apply under the terms
of the directive.65
These four directives represent an important step toward harmonising the
rights and status of third country nationals in all Member States and in granting
them additional rights. There are several problems which must be noted, however. First of all, the directives use different terms than those which apply to
the rights of EU citizens. Member States can apply various conditions to each
right, which suggests that the goal of the Tampere Programme – to approximate
the rights of third country nationals to those of EU citizens – has not been fully
achieved. Second, the Achilles’ heel of the directives is that there are integrationrelated requirements which Member States may apply. Assuming that many
third country nationals do not apply for citizenship in EU Member States
specifically because of these detailed and strict rules, the same situation may
exist with respect to the status of long-term resident if similarly strict requirements are levelled. Third, the effective implementation of the directives will
depend on how strictly the process is monitored by the relevant EU institutions. The minimal role of the European Court of Justice is a problem here. The
Commission has drafted amendments to Article 68 of the Treaty which
provide that in relation to Chapter IV of the EC Treaty, any national court can
seek a preliminary ruling from the European Court of Justice. Remembering
the role of the Court in shaping the system of EU law during the early phase of
European integration, we can say that these amendments would be a fundamental prerequisite for the effectiveness of migration rights in the EU.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

182

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 182

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

4. Latvia’s interests in the area of EU immigration
Latvia’s internal and external choice
As an EU Member State, Latvia has vast opportunities to take part in the
development of EU immigration policy. Theoretically, there are two basic
choices – either Latvia opposes efforts to increase legal migration in the EU, or
it supports that process and takes part in its management. Latvia’s positions
vis-à-vis the further development of EU legislation will be based on that particular choice.
On the one hand, Latvia’s foreign policy position for the period between
2006 and 2010 and a document which defines Latvia’s basic principles, goals,
priorities and activities in terms of EU membership from 2007 to 2013 both
say that Latvia supports the goals of the Hague Programme.66 This means closer
co-operation in internal and judicial affairs. The documents state that it is in
Latvia’s interests to make an investment in the EU’s legal migration policy,
because Latvia ‘wishes to prevent any disintegration in EU policy.’ On the
other hand, the Justice Ministry is ‘cautious in its evaluation of the goals of the
Hague Programme and wishes to review them.’ The Latvian Foreign Ministry
has issued a document ‘The Most Important Issues for Latvia during the Finnish
Presidency of the EU,’ which says that Latvia ‘is cautious vis-à-vis proposals
about the transfer of qualified majority votes to interior and justice affairs.’
Latvia has looked at ways to improve the effectiveness of decisions making in
the Council, and it proposes that in reviewing the Hague Programme, realistically achievable and politically motivated goals should be defined.67 This means
that Latvia has not defined its interests in the area of migration when it comes
to EU policy, and is offering inconsistent and contradictory views.
A lack of co-ordination among the relevant institutions is one reason why
Latvia has problems with planning legal immigration policy and involvement
in the development of EU policy. Immigration policies are handled by five
different government ministries, and that leads to the lack of co-ordination. An
example of ineffective inter-ministerial co-operation is the issue of the roots of
immigration and integration in EU Member States. As was noted before, the
approach of EU Member States to immigration is very closely linked to issues
of integration in society. That is why the European Commission has prepared its
annual ‘Report on Migration and Integration,’ taking Member State interests
into account.68 Latvia is the only Member State which did not take part in the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 183

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

183

preparation of that report, and that is not insignificant. This indicates that no
government institution in Latvia has reacted to the need to analyse immigration
and integration issues in the EU.
Latvia’s government has consistently defended strict immigration policies,
but given the EU directive on the status of third country nationals, the state
has not issued strict regulations in the social sphere or the area of integration.
Latvia’s law is quite liberal, in fact, if compared to laws in other EU Member
States.
Latvia’s activities in terms of EU policy are also influenced by objective
factors. Even though Latvia regained its independence in 1991, the first qualitative and quantitative studies of the labour market, mobility, illegal employment and other immigration-related issues to be conducted at the national
level and with the help of the EU Social Fund will be available in 2007.
It is also true, however, that Latvia has significant advantages in comparison
to Western European countries in this regard. Western European Member States
are forced to deal with the consequences of former migration policies. Latvia,
by contrast, is not a destination for immigrants, and that makes it possible for
Latvia to develop policy in a timely way and in the context of EU trends.
Latvia has experience from the Soviet period in terms of public integration,
and that can be used in relation to potential immigrants in the future.
If Latvia’s interests at the EU level are to be consistent and defendable, it is
important to make internal choices about migration policy. Latvia’s choices are
based on various strategic documents which set the goal to reach the average
standard of living in the EU in the medium term. The length of this period
differs in various studies and forecasts, but this is a point of reference at this
time for development of the country. This also applies to the national economy
and to various aspects of employment.
An open economy is important in Latvia if the EU level is to be reached at
some point, and so far it has ensured rapid growth. Latvia exports products to
more than 80 countries on six continents, and exports of goods and services
represent nearly one-half of GDP.69 This is one of the highest proportions in
the EU, and it means that Latvia’s economy is very open indeed. Latvia’s economy is also open in the context of financial markets. This facilitates receiving
foreign loans for investment projects, and that has promoted economic growth.
Latvia has been open to foreign direct investments – foreign-held properties
and foreign investments in the national economy.70 The ongoing inflow of

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

184

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 184

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

foreign capital shows that Latvia’s economy is attractive to investors. Latvia is
well integrated in the international flow of goods and services and capital, but
it has not yet become integrated in the fourth of the so-called EU four freedoms – the movement of people.
The importance of the labour force in Latvia’s growth
If the structure of manufacturing in Latvia remains unchanged, GDP in
Latvia could increase by approximately 2.6% per year even if the availability
of capital and employment does not change. Bank forecasts in Latvia indicate
that the labour supply is going to shrink, and if increased capital does not
compensate for this, the economy will shrink. The most optimistic forecast
from the Hansabanka bank is that the labour force will shrink very slowly over
the next five years – expansion of 1% in 2006, but then shrinkage of 0.1% in
2007 and 0.7% in 2010.71
This forecast is based on the assumption that local residents will become
more actively involved in the labour market and that some 40,000 economically
active people will emigrate from Latvia by 2010. Capital volumes could theoretically increase to a sufficient degree to neutralise the effects of this shrinkage
in the labour force, but the truth is that emigration numbers may be higher.
The Bank of Latvia, for instance, has argued that the first wave of emigration is
not yet over.72 Over the next 10 years, according to the Central bank, 200,000
economically active people will leave. Capital increases of any level would not
compensate for this shock to the availability of labour. Calculations based on
manufacturing functions show that GDP would drop by 12% in comparison to
a situation in which there is no emigration at all. Competition over workers
has increased between Latvia and other countries, also among various sectors
of the economy within Latvia. According to research conducted by businesspeople and banks, the administrative framework for immigration at this time
is out of line with the market situation. This, according to various studies, creates
greater macroeconomic risks.73
The deficit in the labour force can significantly hinder Latvia’s ability to
achieve the EU average standard of living. Unemployment indicators are
dropping in Latvia, labour costs are rising, and the availability of labour is
shrinking. Latvia’s rapid economic growth is largely driven by enhanced labour
force productivity. Average productivity in 2005 was at approximately 48% of

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 185

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

185

the figure in the EU-25. Assuming that the manufacturing function retains
structural stability and the number of employed people does not change, we
can calculate that the labour force productivity rates of Latvia and the EU-25
will even out in 15 or 16 years (with the EU-25 figure increasing by an average
of 2% a year). A rapid decline in labour availability can threaten macroeconomic stability and productivity convergence with the EU-25.74 This means
that national management of immigration processes, Latvia will not achieve
its strategic goal of achieving the average standard of living in the EU.
The demographic crisis and the Latvia’s economy
Despite the increased birth rate in Latvia over the last several years, depopulation is continuing. Over the next five to seven years, people born in the
1990s will enter the labour market, and at that time the fertility rate was very
low. Latvia will face a serious labour shortage. It is expected that the greatest
loss will be experienced in terms of the number of working age residents –
15% fewer than last year. By 2020, Latvia will have approximately 1.6 million
residents aged 15 to 74.75
The prestigious international credit ratings agency Standard & Poor’s is
calling on Latvia to conduct reforms so as to deal with the aging of the population and the effect which this will have on the country’s fiscal situation. Otherwise, S&P warns, the country’s credit rating could be lowered. In a 2005 report,
the agency says that global aging is a problem which will affect Latvia, too.
The proportion of middle-aged people in Latvia could increase from 39.5% in
2005 to 50.5% in 2050. The proportion of people aged 65+ could increase from
16.5% now to 26.1% by 2050. The proportion of working-age people could decline
from 69% to 59%, and overall population losses are also forecast. The population
last year was around 2.3 million, but by 2050 it might drop to 1.9 million.
Standard & Poor’s indicates that changes in the age structure of society can
have various effects on the country.76
Without reforms in Latvia, pensions will be equal to 8.2% of GDP in 2050,
as opposed to 6.4% at this time, and health care will cost 6.2% of GDP as
opposed to 5.2% right now. Expenditures related to the aging of the population could increase from 12.3% of GDP to 16.5% of GDP in 2050. Standard &
Poor’s predicts that in that case national budget spending will increase to 46%
of GDP. Government debt might increase to 128% of GDP in 2050, and the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

186

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 186

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

budget deficit could be equal to 10.8% of GDP. A deterioration in the fiscal
situation could mean a lower credit rating for Latvia – the ‘A’ level which exists
at this time would not be appropriate in the forecast situation.77 All of this
suggests that the aging population will be added to the labour force shortage
as an obstacle against achieving the EU average standard of living.
The labour force deficit
Businesspeople in Latvia are increasingly worried about the labour shortage. This is a particularly significant problem in construction, retailing and
health care. Demand outstrips supply in all of these areas, and this is a problem
which may have a very deleterious effect on regional development. Even the
local governments in Latvia’s largest towns and cities cannot find labour resources for their economic projects.78
The Latexpo exhibition company interviewed 13 personnel selection
companies and 32 employers in Latvia and found that there is a shortage in
Latvia not only of well-paid jobs, but also of qualified workers. The professions in
which there is the greatest demand for workers include retailing, construction
and public accommodations, according to the survey of employers.79 Fully
40% of food production companies had experienced labour shortages during
the preceding year, according to a study run by the Latvian Federation of Food
Companies to consider the situation with workers and specialists and their
professional training.
Seeking to deal with the labour deficit, companies in Latvia are increasingly
insisting on importing workers from the East, from the CIS. The European
Association of Chambers of Commerce and Industry found this in a survey.
The Latvian Chamber of Commerce and Industry surveyed 412 companies in
all of Latvia’s administrative districts – 229 manufacturing companies and
183 service providers.80
‘If we are to satisfy all of our contractual obligations, we need to hire
another 100 people right now. We will be forced to bring them in from Belarus,
Ukraine and Moldova,’ says Jânis Lancers, president of the PBLC construction
firm. The same problem is indicated by Daiïrade Koks, one of the leading
wood processing companies in Latvia. Its personnel director, Jânis Lasmanis:
‘In future, we may find ourselves in a situation where life itself forces us to
do so.’

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 187

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

187

‘There is a lack of specialists at all levels,’ says Ojârs Bite, board chairman of
the OK building materials firm, in talking about the construction sector. Employees often seem to have the proper education and experience, but when they
get to work, it turns out that the quality of their work is very poor, says Bite.81
The labour shortage also has a negative effect on regional development
projects. Even Latvia’s largest local governments (those in Rîga, Daugavpils
and Liepâja) lack local labour resources. The future of Rîga’s development
programme is dim, say specialists from the Rîga City Council Welfare Department. The city’s population is aging, the proportion of people of working age
is diminishing, and there will not be sufficient numbers of newborns to compensate for the overall aging process.82
Latvia’s chances
Latvia, unlike other countries in Eastern Europe, is not a destination for
immigrants, even though there is much potential for greater migration in the
direction of the EU in the countries of the CIS. This is because of Latvia’s comparatively low level of social welfare, as well as its strict immigration policies.
Even though the Latvian economy is increasingly suffering from labour
shortages, immigration policy at this time ensures that the importation of
guest workers is often too expensive and complicated for businesses. Existing
immigration policies are supported by the majority of Latvia’s population, and
people are quite negative about the idea of guest workers from other countries.
Indeed, Latvians have the most negative approach toward migrants among
people in all EU Member States.83 Moreover, these critical positions are taken
both by ethnic Latvians and non-Latvians. This is a consequence of Soviet-era
migration policies. People are insecure about their identity, and they fear
competition.
The ability of companies in Latvia to enhance productivity and to create
greater added value per employee is by no means exhausted, because at this
point it is at just 40 to 50% of the EU average level. Modern technologies and
better work organisation would reduce the need for human resources and
increase productivity and profit.
Businesspeople complain that they cannot ensure the rapid increase in
productivity that is demanded by Latvia’s economic situation on their own,
and so they are investing great hopes in money from the EU’s Structural

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

188

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 188

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

Funds. When asked about further technological potential, businesspeople have
different views. People in the forest industry, for instance, think that productivity can be boosted by 30 to 50%, while representatives of retailing and the
service sector are sceptical about the possibility of any significant improvements in productivity.84
Latvian companies are trying to adapt to the situation in the labour market
and the existing labour shortages establishing subsidiaries abroad, moving
manufacturing facilities from Rîga to other parts of the country, and promoting
domestic labour mobility in Latvia to support business development. Still, as
noted, companies are increasingly thinking about hiring workers from abroad.
The illegal labour market appears if there is insufficient labour supply for
economic development and immigration policies are too strict. Companies are
encouraged to hire illegal workers from abroad. It has been suggested that
some 40% of people who work in the ever-expanding construction sector are
illegal, and the state loses LVL 100 million a year in unpaid taxes. Workers
come from Belarus and Ukraine. Government policies in opposition to illegal
employment have been ineffective because of a shortage of administrative
resources and capacity, as well as because of poor information exchange and
ineffective systems of punishment for those who violate the law.

5. Scenarios for Latvia’s immigration policy
Immigration policy determines the way in which a government manages
issues related to the movement of individuals. The policy depends on the
factors and goals of economic development, the local labour environment, the
prevailing demographic situation, as well as public reaction vis-à-vis issues
related to immigration – i.e., the likelihood that integration will take place. In
today’s globalised world, processes of integration are closely linked to international policy and external environments. This is particularly important to
small countries.
The information which has been collected during the course of this research
project enables a review of the existing situation and the modelling of several
scenarios for future immigration policies in Latvia. There are various possibilities here, and the process depends on policy goals and economic interests.
Each option has certain advantages, shortcomings and risks, and all of these

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 189

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

189

must be taken into account when policies are analysed. Although options are
quite different, three major approaches toward migration policy planning in
Latvia can be defined.
5.1. The conservative approach
The conservative approach is based on the idea that existing immigration
policies in Latvia should be preserved, not changed. This means that rules in
the law on immigration as to the import of workers would not be changed,
and the policy would be implemented as has been the case so far – the guest
worker must be paid at least the average monthly wage in the month before
taxes are paid, a monthly state fee of LVL 35 must be paid, an additional LVL 3
to 5 must be paid for documents, and LVL 70 to 170 must be paid for the temporary residency permit. The employer must prove that there are no specialists
in Latvia who could do the work – authorisation to import a worker is acceptable only if that is the case.
Advantages and opportunities
This approach is aimed at increasing the proportion of economic active
residents in Latvia, at increasing salaries, and enhancing labour productivity
and/or at changing the qualifications of the knowledge force while gradually
moving to a more knowledge-intensive economy. Strict immigration policies
encourage businesses to modernise equipment and technologies so as to
reduce employment numbers while improving productivity.
The conservative approach also helps to improve the organisation of work.
In the construction industry, for instance, there is much that can be done to
improve the way in which work takes place on building lots. According to the
Latvian Builders Association, construction workers spend five to six hours per
day doing productive work, while abroad the level is between 6.8 and 7.2
hours a day.
Strict immigration policies are a prerequisite for conditions that would
encourage émigrés to return to Latvia. People who work in construction and
other industries in Sweden and Ireland have obtained new knowledge, and
they will be very valuable employees when they return to Latvia, but only if
the government persuade businesspeople to promote that return. Current
immigration policy also encourages internal migration processes, helping
companies to attract workers from rural regions and to make more thorough

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

190

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 190

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

use of domestic labour force reserves. Among those Latvian residents who are
between 15 and 74 years old, only 57.8% hold jobs, while in other countries of
the world, the percentage is close to two-thirds. In the Rçzekne and Ludza
districts of Latvia, unemployment at this writing is above 25%, and 37,000
people in Latvia have told researchers that they have lost all hope about the
possibility of finding work.85 The tense situation in the labour market creates
difficulties for businesspeople but it helps to heal society by helping to improve the lives of those whose services would be rejected by companies under
other circumstances – differently abled people, pensioners and former prisoners,
among others.
The conservative approach also helps businesses to deal with the labour
force deficit within the context of the EU, without importing workers from
countries which are not EU Member States. It is in the interests of Latvian businesses to maintain the open labour market for new EU Member States.
Limitations and risks
Latvia’s labour market is not competitive at the Baltic level, because it is far
easier to import guest workers into Lithuania and Estonia, and the process is
cheaper for businesses. This is an important problem in terms of attracting
investments, and there is reduced interest among foreign capital providers in
the Latvian economy.
When the labour force departs for other European Union Member States,
that places pressure on employers in Latvia. In some sectors they must provide
sufficiently competitive salaries to compete with employers in other countries.
Rapid increases in wages reduce Latvia’s competitiveness in attracting investments, however. If higher wages are not accompanied by enhanced productivity, Latvian businesses can lose competitiveness in the market.
5.2. The liberal approach
The liberal approach is aimed at amending the law on immigration to make
it easier for guest workers to access the Latvian labour market in line with the
interests of businesspeople and businesses. The liberal approach seeks the
withdrawal of the demand that the guest worker must be paid at least the
average wage in the state during the month before the payment of taxes. The
state fee of LVL 35 would be reduced or rejected altogether.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 191

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

191

Advantages and opportunities
Importing workers would help to preserve economic growth for a longer
period of time. Latvia’s rapid economic growth depends on capital, productivity
and the labour force. When there are shortages of workers, it becomes necessary to find guest workers in line with the needs of the economy. Use of guest
workers would allow businesses to maintain prices and costs, thus maintaining higher competitiveness in the domestic and the foreign market. A liberal
immigration policy would reduce differences between Latvia’s labour market
and that in neighbouring countries and that would be of key importance in
attracting investments.
The involvement of guest workers in Latvia’s economy would also reduce the
negative effects of the country’s demographic crisis and the mass emigration
of its residents on the national economy and on social policy. Acceptable legal
immigration rules would also reduce losses to the national budget which are
caused by illegal immigration at this time. Businesses would be less interested
in the risk of hiring illegally imported workers. Guest workers from the CIS
might find it comparatively easier to adapt to the Latvian environment – short
distances, no language barriers.
Limitations and risks
Import of workers would not encourage businesspeople to develop their
businesses through investments in technologies related to the knowledge-based
economy. Liberal immigration policies would enhance the productivity of local
workers more rapidly, and it would not promote higher wages for workers.
This, in turn, could encourage even greater emigration. Employers who use
guest workers would not be encouraged to make more thorough use of Latvia’s
internal labour resources (people in peripheral regions, young people, groups
of residents with poor social protections, etc.).
A liberal immigration policy would also not encourage businesspeople to
look for people who have emigrated from Latvia and who have higher demands
vis-à-vis the domestic labour market. The use of guest workers would also not
stimulate socially responsible employment policies which are based on social
dialogue and guarantees of social and labour rights. Increased immigration
would create various economic and social problems. Not all employers will be
ready to use legal workers, because of taxes they have to pay. Guest workers
can be denied social guarantees, too. If the number of people entering from

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

192

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 192

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

other EU Member States were to increase rapidly, Latvia would have to apply
the rights which the EU has defined vis-à-vis family members of those who
enter the country. This would create an additional burden on the country’s
social budget. Latvia must not forget about EU law which applies to non-nationals. Furthermore, many people in Latvia have a negative attitude toward
greater numbers of guest workers. This is rooted in people’s experience with
Soviet-era industrialisation, when Latvian identity was threatened. Competition
is also a concern. It is also true that Latvia has not designed any integration
programme for those who arrive in the country.
5.3. An incrementally liberal approach
An incrementally liberal approach is based on the idea that over the next
five to seven years – the period when Latvia’s labour market will be most intensively affected by the demographic crisis of the 1990s – immigration policy
should be gradually liberalised. Policy would not change in the immediate
future, and work would be done to improve the labour market in Latvia, to
make more complete use of internal resources, to implement socially responsible
employment policies, and to ensure that the state’s policies vis-à-vis illegal
immigration and labour become far more effective. Once that is accomplished,
there would be gradual changes in the law on immigration to ensure that
guest workers can enter certain sectors of the labour market. In future, the
guest workers would be a component of further economic development.
Advantages and opportunities
Declining population numbers and aging populations have created a shortage of labour in the EU labour market. Since 1999, the EU has used the aforementioned incrementally liberal approach to promote legal migration while
instituting new requirements for integration of societies at the same time. In
this context, Latvia’s interests would be well served by implementation of the
EU’s Hague Programme and by introducing EU work permits that would be
valid in all EU Member States, thus increasing Europe’s attractiveness in the eyes
of highly qualified workers. It is also of key importance to regulate residency
and work permits for seasonal workers from non-Member State nations. There
must be rules as to the ability of such people to work in the EU for a certain
number of months each year. Work permits could be issued for five years.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

09:59

Page 193

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

193

Gradual policy changes would promote the more complete use of internal
resources, the implementation of socially responsible employment policies, and
further opposition against illegal migration and employment. The existing
immigration policy creates circumstances which encourage émigré workers to
return home.
In future, imports of workers could help to preserve growth in those economic sectors in which there is higher added value to work. Economic growth
in Latvia depends on capital, productivity and qualified workers. A liberal
immigration policy in certain sectors would reduce the differences between
Latvia’s labour market and that in its neighbouring countries. This would be
of importance in attracting investments.
Limitations and risks
Liberalisation of immigration depends on too many prerequisites, and their
establishment requires time, political interest and business loyalty. This may
reduce economic growth and competitiveness. Increased immigration can create
various economic and social problems, because not all employers will wish to
use legal workers. That allows them not to pay taxes and to deny social guarantees to guest workers. If the number of people from other EU Member States
were to increase rapidly, Latvia would have to apply EU rights to family
members, and this would place greater burdens on the social budget. Latvia
also has to comply with EU laws vis-à-vis the citizens of third countries. People
in Latvia are not prepared for a new wave of immigration. They remember the
industrialisation which took place in the Soviet Union, and this creates fears
about threats against identity and concerns about competition. It is also true
that Latvia does not have an integration programme for newly arrived people.

Summary
Migration trends in the world are dictated by two key considerations – the
desire of people in poorly developed countries to improve their quality of life
by finding better life conditions, and the need in developed countries for workers
at a time when there are concerns about aging and declining populations.
Since the late 1990s, EU immigration policy has developed quite rapidly, despite
the fact that there are contradictions in this area among the various Member

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

194

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 194

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

States, that there have been value conflicts, that there is such a large diversity
in identities in Europe, and that the global environment has been putting greater
pressure on welfare in Europe. The interdependency of various political approaches changes EU policy, too. Latvia must take advantage of the opportunity
to participate in European policy development, but first it must define its
national interests and implement them both in Latvia and at the EU level.

References and notes
1 Cholewinski,

R. Family Reunification and Conditions Placed on Family Members:
Dismantling a Fundamental Human Right. European Journal of Migration and Law, No. 4,
2002, p. 272.
2 Franck, T.J. (1999). The Empowered Self: Law and Society in the Age of Individualism. Oxford:
Oxford University .
3 Ijabs, I. (2006). Vçrtîbas veido Eiropu: pârskats par Eiropas identitâtes aksioloìisko dimensiju [Values Shape Europe: A Review of the Axiological Dimension of European Identity].
SAK.
4 Eiropa nespçj vienoties par imigrâcijas politiku [Europe Unable to Reach Agreement on
Immigration Policy]. Reuters, BNS news agencies. 3 July 2006.
5 Ibid.
6 Council of the European Union. Council and Commission Action Plan Implementing the
Hague Programme on Strengthening Freedom, Security and Justice in the European
Union, 2005.
7 Ibid.
8 Gijs Verhofstads: ‘Eiropas Savienotâs Valstis’ varçtu kïût par ietekmîgu spçku pasaulç
[Guy Verhofstadt: ‘United States of Europe’ Could Become Major Force in World]. LETA
news agency – EUOBSERVER. 2 December 2005.
9 Ibid.
10 Reuters, BNS news agencies. Eiropa nespçj…, op. cit.
11 Ibid.
12 Cited in The Economist, 9 December 2005.
13 Ibid.
14 Eurostat. Survey on EU Development, November 2005.
15 International Organisation for Migration. World Migration, 2005.
16 European Commission Report on the Demographic Situation in the EU, 2005.
17 Special survev on migration. The Economist, 2–8 November 2002, p. 11.
18 International Organisation for Migration. World Migration, 2005.
19 World Economic Forum. Wagstyl, S. (ed.). Eastern Europe, Financial Times, United Kingdom. Financial Times International Media Group. 7 May 2006.
20 The End of Europe: Special Report. Newsweek, 3 May 2004.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 195

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

195

21 Ibid.
22 85/381/EEC: Commission Decision of 8 July 1985 setting up a prior communication and

consultation procedure on migration policies in relation to non-member countries. OJ, L
217, 14 August 1985, pp. 25–26.
23 281, 283-285 and 287/85, Federal Republic of Germany and others v. Commission [1987].
24 For a general review of EU migration law and issues related to same, see Guild, E. (2004).
The Legal Elements of European Identity: EU Citizenship and Migration Law. Kluwer
Law International.
25 The norms of the Schengen Convention and the acquis will not be reviewed separately in
this paper. For more detailed analysis, see Groenendijk, K., Guild, E. and Minderhoud, P.
(2003) In Search of Europe's Borders. Kluwer Law International. For a review of EU
migration law, see Guild, E. The Legal Elements…, op. cit.
26 Directives 90/364, 90/365 and 93/96.
27 Weiler, J. Introduction to European Citizenship – Identity and Differentity. In: La Torre,
M. (ed.). European Citizenship: An Institutional Challenge. pp. 13–24, p. 2.
28 For a full list, see http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/news/information_dossiers/the_hague_
2006/scoreboard_en.htm. Last viewed 29 August 2006.
29 Ibid.
30 See Guild, E. The Legal Elements…, op. cit., pp. 168-170.
31 These deal with strategies related to basic rights and citizenship, refugee rights and
immigration, integration, administration of borders, the fight against terrorism and
organised crime, co-operation among legal institutions in civil and criminal cases, as well
as co-operation among polices agencies. A full list can be found on the ‘Scoreboard’ page
and at http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/immigration/fsj_immigration_intro_en.htm.
Last viewed 29 August 2006.
32 See the relevant sub-sections at http://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/s1700.htm. Last viewed
10 September 2006.
33 Green Paper on an EU Approach to Managing Economic Migration, COM (2004) 811.
34 Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on an
open method of co-ordination for the Community immigration policy, COM (2001) 387
final. A summary of this document can be found at http://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/
lvb/133155.htm. Last viewed 10 September 2006.
35 Green Paper, op. cit.
36 COM (2001) 386 OJ C 332 E 27 November 200.
37 Communication COM (2005) 480, 10 October 2005.
38 Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions of 1 September
2005. A Common Agenda for Integration, Framework for the Integration of Third Country
Nationals in the European Union. COM (2005) 389 final.
39 See Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

196

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 196

KRISTÎNE KRÛMA, IVARS INDÂNS

immigration, integration and employment, COM (2003) 336 final. See also Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the European
Economic and Social committee and the Committee of Regions – First Annual Report on
Migration and Integration, COM (2004) 508.
40 Chiarra, F. and Nascimbene, B. EU Political Trends. In: Casareo, V. (ed.). The Eleventh
Italian Report on Migration 2005. Monza, Italy: Polimetrica International Scientific Publisher,
p. 69.
41 See http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/doc_centre/asylum/doc_asylum_intro_en.htm.
42 Communication on a common policy concerning illegal immigration COM (2001) 672,
15 November 2001.
43 COM (2005) 391, 1 September 2005.
44 Chiarra, F. and B. Nascimbene, B. op. cit., p. 74.
45 COM (2005) 309, 1 September 2005 and COM (2005) 491, 12 October 2005.
46 Communications concerning ‘Action priorities to answer immigration challenges. First
action taken after the Hampton Court Meeting’. COM (2005) 621, 30 November 2005.
47 See Green Paper on a Community return policy for illegal residents COM (2002) 175 final.
48 Case C-369/90, Micheletti (1992).
49 Case C-2002/02, Chen and others (2004).
50 Case 413/99, R. and Baumbast (2002).
51 OJ L, 158, 30 April 2004, p. 77. The directive amends Regulation 1612/68 and repeals
directives 64/221/EEC, 68/36/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC,
90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC.
52 See, e.g., Case C-370/90, Surinder Singh (1992), C-60/00, Mary Carpenter (2002), C-109/01,
Akrich (2003).
53 C-113/89, Rush Portguesa Lda (1990), C-43/93, Vander Elst (1994).
54 We must remember the progressive interpretations of the European Court of Justice vis-àvis partnership agreements. See C-265/03, Simmutenkov (2005). For a discussion of how
the Turkish agreement is to be interpreted vis-à-vis the new directives, see Groenendijk, K.
(2006) Citizens and Third Country Nationals: Differential Treatment or Discrimination?
In: Carlier, J-Y. and Guild, E. (eds.). The Future of Free Movement of Persons in the EU.
Bruylant, pp. 79–103.
55 Directive 2003/109.EC is published in Official Journal, L 016, 23 January 2004, pp. 44–5,
and it has been in force since the date of publication in all EU Member States except the
UK, Ireland and Denmark.
56 Halleskov, L. The Long-Term Residents Directive: A Fulfilment of the Tampere Objective
of Near Equality? European Journal of Migration and Law, No. 7, 2005, p. 186.
57 Council Directive 2004/43/EC, which introduces equal attitudes vis-à-vis individuals
irrespective of race or ethnicity, 29 June 2006, OJ L 180, 19 July 2000, pp. 22–26.
58 Council Directive 2000/78/EC, which defines a system related to equal attitudes in the
fields of employment and professions. 27 November 2000, OV L 303, 2 December 2000,
pp. 16–22.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 197

Migration Policy and the Future of the European Union

197

59 See Articles 3, 4, 12 and 15 of the Preamble, Sections 1 and 5 of Article 4, and Section 2 of

Article 7. For a more detailed review, see Groenendijk, K., Family Reunification…, op. cit.
60 Case C-540/03, Parliament v. Council, 27 June 2006.
61 For details about this, see John, A. Family Reunification for Migrants and Refugees: A

Forgotten Human Right? See http://www.fd.uc.pt/hrc/working_papers/arturojohn.pdf.
62 C-157/03, Commission v. Spain, 9 November 2004.
63 Council Directive 2005/71/EC, specifically devised for the admission of citizens from

third countries for scientific research purposes, 10 October 2005, OJ L 289, 3 November
2005, p. 0015. There are also two recommendations – 2005/761/EC and 2005/762/EC which
speak to short-term visas for researchers who wish to work in the European Union. The
recommendations basically indicate that the norms of the directive should be implemented
right away.
64 OJ L 375, 23 December 2004, pp. 0012–0018.
65 For detailed analysis, see Peers, S. Key Legislative Developments on Migration in the
European Union.European Journal of Migration and Law, No. 7, 2005, pp. 87–118.
66 See www.mfa.gov.lv for the Foreign Ministry’s foreign policy positions.
67 See www.tm.gov.lv for the Justice Ministry’s views on the Hague Programme.
68 http://www.politika.lv/index.php?f=1011, SEC (2006), 892, 30 June 2006.
69 Central Statistical Board, 2005.
70 LETA-EPI data.
71 Vai Latvijai darbaspçka imigrâcija? [Labour Force Immigration for Latvia?]. Hansabanka
analytical discussions, 12 June 2006.
72 Bank of Latvia research, 12 April 2006.
73 “Vai Latvijai…”, op. cit.
74 Ibid.
75 Central Statistical Board. Latvian Statistical Annual, 2005.
76 Standard & Poor’s aicina Latviju veikt reformas [Standard & Poor’s Calls for Reforms in
Latvia].LETA news agency, 7 July 2006.
77 Ibid.
78 Latvijas imigrâcijas politika: problçmas un perspektîvas [Latvian Immigration Policy:
Problems and Prospects]. Latvian Institute of International Affairs, 2006.
79 The survey was published 17 October 2005.
80 The survey was published 23 October 2005.
81 The two statements come from Latvian Institute of International Affairs. Latvijas…, op. cit.
82 Ibid.
83 Ibid.
84 Paper presented by Elîna Egle, general director of the Latvian Confederation of
Employers, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 18 January 2006.
85 Latvian Institute of International Affairs. Latvijas imigrâcijas…, op. cit.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 198

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge
and Innovation
Europe needs strong economic foundations if it is to preserve and develop
its values in the 21st century. The Lisbon Strategy launched in 2000 is one of
the main initiatives in promoting economic growth in Europe. The strategy
was developed in response to new challenges which the EU was facing – globalisation, aging societies, and enlargement to the East.
The aim of this article is to analyse the development of the Lisbon Strategy
from its announcement through the end of 2006, looking at the strategy both in
the EU as a whole and in Latvia individually. There will also be a focus on one
of the central issues in the strategy – how to promote knowledge and innovation,
and how to deal with challenges in this area. In conclusion, some pre-conditions for successful implementation of the Lisbon Strategy will be identified.

The Lisbon Strategy: from political declarations
to reform initiatives
During the course of nearly seven years, the Lisbon Strategy has gradually
developed from a broad and generalised declaration of socio-economic goals,
as defined by political leaders, to a set of concrete activities at the national,
regional and local level in Europe.
The strategy dates back to March 2000, when the European Council, meeting in Lisbon, announced a new strategic goal for the European Union over
the next 10 years – to become the most competitive, dynamic and knowledgebased economy in the world so as to ensure sustainable economic growth,
more and better jobs, and greater social cohesion.1 Two major goals were

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 199

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

199

defined – preparing for the establishment of a competitive, dynamic and
knowledge-based economy, and modernising the European social model by
investing in people and by establishing an active welfare state. Emphasis in the
first of these goals was placed on the development of the information society,
the establishment of the European Innovation and Research Area, the creation
of an environment favourable for the launch of new businesses (especially
small and medium enterprises), economic reforms to improve the operations
of the internal market, effective and integrated financial markets, and co-ordination of macroeconomic policy. The focus in modernising the European social
model, in turn, has been on education, active employment policies, modernisation of social protection, and greater social inclusion.
The open method of co-ordination was defined by the European Council as
an important mechanism in pursuing the strategy. The open method of coordination is defined as an alternative to the traditional community method
that is based on approximation of laws. The new method is based on guidelines, good practice, regular monitoring, etc. This is a far more flexible approach,
allowing each Member State to select the most appropriate methods and
instruments for pursuing the goals that have been set by all Member States
working together.3
Despite the political pronouncements made at the highest level of the EU,
there was hardly any active pursuit of the Lisbon Strategy’s goals in the first
few years after the relevant summit meeting. There were too many goals. Implementation of some required painful reforms at the level of Member States,
and political support was often difficult to achieve. There was increasing scepticism among members of the public, experts and the mass media as to the
Lisbon Strategy. Particular mockery was devoted to a strategic goal which was
formulated less than successfully – to catch up with the US economy by 2010.
A renewed strategy for Growth and Jobs
Early in 2005, when the EU conducted a mid-phase evaluation of the strategy,
it was generally agreed that Europe was lagging far behind the goals that had
been set out in the Lisbon Strategy. The implementation of the goals was seen
as the Achilles’ heel of the process.3 Headed by José Manuel Barroso, the European Commission announced a renewal of the strategy, this time emphasising
just two key goals – economic growth and greater employment. Thus the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

200

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 200

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

strategy took on a new name – the Growth and Jobs Strategy. This represented
a far more pragmatic approach to the process. The EU no longer maintained
the pompous idea of catching up with the United States. Instead, it decided to
focus on sustainable economic growth and new and better jobs.
The renewal of the strategy also meant a new partnership between the EU
and its Member States in drafting the Lisbon Programme and in preparing
National Reform Programmes in each Member State. The Community Lisbon
Programme is focused on those issues which can be resolved at the supranational level.4 That particularly applies to such areas as the internal market,
improvements in infrastructure, and creation of better conditions for business.
The main reforms that are needed in pursuit of the strategy, however, must
be handled at the level of Member States. In the autumn of 2005, each Member
State drafted its own National Reform Programme for the period between 2005
and 2008. These programmes cover all of the social and economic initiatives to
be implemented at the national level. The programmes were drafted in accordance with the Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs in the areas of macroeconomics, microeconomics and employment.5 Each Member State had to select
the appropriate processes in pursuing the goals. The national programmes are
also an instrument for monitoring. Member States must file annual reports on
what has been achieved.
In 2006, the European Council defined four new priorities for the strategy,
ones to be pursued in 2007.6 These include greater investments in knowledge
and innovation, development of the business potential of small and medium
enterprises in particular, expansion in employment opportunities, as well as
implementation of effective and sustainable energy policies.
The Integrated Guidelines and the steps taken in pursuit of the strategy
show that despite the fact that the announced aim has been to focus on the two
main issues of growth and jobs, the strategy still covers a very wide range of
issues. It covers such areas as the environment, energy supplies, lifelong
learning, care for preschool children, liberalisation of taxes and services, etc.
Some of the goals are mutually incompatible – budget discipline and greater
investments in research and development, for instance. So widespread and
diverse a range of issues in a single strategy makes the strategy complicated
and difficult to survey. At the same time, however, it also ensures a complex
approach to issues of socio-economic development.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 201

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

201

Synergy between the Lisbon Strategy and the Structural Funds
All available resources must be mobilised at the EU and the national level if
the Lisbon Strategy is to be implemented. In less developed Member States,
there must be synergy between the Lisbon goals and the activities which are
financed by the EU’s Structural Funds. During the new Structural Fund planning
period 2007-2013, particular attention is being devoted to the way in which the
relevant funding can help in achieving the goals of the Lisbon Strategy –
ensuring that European regions become more attractive for investments and
employment, as well as promoting the development of knowledge, innovation
and employment.7
The framework for Structural Fund spending between 2007 and 2013 states
that in less developed regions, at least 60% of the money must be spent in
pursuit of the Lisbon goals, while in other regions, at least 75% of funding must
be devoted to that purpose.8 This means that at least EUR 200 billion will be
invested in pursuit of the relevant goals, and that, in turn, indicates that there
must be close co-operation between those officials who are responsible for the
National Reform Programmes and those who are responsible for Structural
Fund financing. Regional and local governments must be actively involved in
the pursuit of the Lisbon goals.
Achievements in seven years
The European Commission released its annual report on the Lisbon Strategy
progress in December 2006, concluding that the reforms were beginning to
bear fruit in terms of growth and employment.9 The EU forecast economic
growth of 2.8% in 2006 – significant progress since 2005, when EU growth was
at a level of just 1.7%. All Member States have defined national goals in terms
of financing research and development. If all of the defined goals are achieved,
financing for R&D in the EU will be at a level of 2.6% of GDP in the year 2010.
In 2002, meeting in Barcelona, the European Council defined a goal of 3% in
this regard,10 but even 2.6% will be much better than the level of 1.9% in 2005.
The EU also expects seven million new jobs to be created between 2006 and
2008, which could boost the percentage of employed people from 64% in 2005
to 66% in 2008.
The report also presents several ‘success stories’ – approval of the services
directive, improvements in financial services, new frameworks for supporting

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

202

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 202

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

research, development and innovation, guidelines for fiscal incentives in promoting R&D, agreement on the 7th Framework Programme for research and
technological development so as to increase R&D spending by 75% between
2007 and 2013, support for major public-private partnerships, as well as support for small and medium enterprises in the context of the Competitiveness
and Innovation Framework Programme.
At the same time, several other important proposals are still on the agenda –
transfer of pensions to promote labour mobility in the internal market, improvements to the way in which transport and energy markets function, establishment of an effective and affordable system of intellectual property rights, a
framework for audiovisual and fee-based services, and modernisation of
important rules in the area of taxes and customs fees. Important goals in 2007
include further opening of markets so as to promote innovation and to offer
better choices to consumers, further work on opening markets throughout the
world, offering new opportunities to businesses in the EU, striking a better
balance between flexibility and security in the job market, and improving the
quality of EU educational systems.
Economic calculations suggest that if the goals of the Lisbon Strategy are
achieved, that could make a significant investment in improving the prevailing
economic and social situation in the EU. GDP would increase by 12 to 23%,
and employment would rise by 11%.11 It must be said, however, that more
time will be needed to evaluate the results of some of the reforms which are
being pursued. For instance, it usually takes some time before investments in
education and research are transformed into economic benefits.
In evaluating the development of the Lisbon Strategy over nearly seven
years, it has to be said that increasing attention has been devoted to the implementation of the strategy. A framework has been established in pursuit of the
necessary reforms and processes of modernisation. In the spring of each year,
the European Council defines major strategic directions, and the work is then
done via the Community and the National Lisbon programmes. Progress reports are issued in the autumn of each year. These are evaluated by the European Commission, which then makes recommendations as to what should be
done in future. This, of course, creates additional bureaucracy, with many new
programmes, reports, guidelines and the like. On the other hand, the framework also provides more opportunities to evaluate achievements and to decide
on what must be done next in pursuit of the strategy. The results of reform in

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 203

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

203

the various Member States can more easily be compared, and Member States
can adapt best practice from one another.
Since the renewal of the strategy in 2005, political leadership has been important at the level of the EU. The president of the European Commission,
Barroso, has been actively involved in the implementation of the strategy. Of
importance in the future will be a review of the renewed strategy in 2008 and
the decisions which will be taken at that time at the European and the national
level.
Latvia’s priority: a knowledge-based economy
Latvia, like other Member States, prepared its National Reform Programme
for 2005–200812 in the autumn of 2005. The programme states that if Latvia is to
continue to enjoy rapid economic growth, it must move from a labour-intensive
economy to one that is based on knowledge. Manufacturing of products with
low added value is common in Latvian business today, while the proportion of
high-tech industries is negligible. One important problem, according to the
Latvian programme, is that people’s education and skills are not in line with
the demands of the labour market. There are also distinct regional differences
in this regard in Latvia. The programme defines five major areas for economic
policy development in pursuit of the Lisbon Strategy’s goals in Latvia. These
are ensuring macroeconomic stability, stimulating knowledge and innovation,
creating an environment which is favourable and attractive for investments and
labour, promoting higher employment, and improving people’s education
and skills.
Latvia’s national Lisbon programme also defines several indicators which
must be achieved by 2010. These are based on Latvia’s actual situation, and in
some senses they lag behind the indicators that have been defined at the EU
level. The EU, for instance, hopes to achieve a level of employment of 70%
among people aged 15 to 64 by 2010, while Latvia’s goal is to achieve a level of
67%. The EU wants R&D financing to be equal to 3% of GDP, while Latvia
plans spending at a level of just 1.5% of GDP. Latvia is moving toward the
goals, it has to be acknowledged – in 2005, employment in the aforementioned
age group was at a level of 63.3%, while financing for research and development was at a level of 0.57% of GDP.13
Latvia, like other Member States, has appointed a single government official
who is responsible for co-ordinating the national Lisbon programme – Mr Lisbon,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

204

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 204

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

as he is known. In Latvia, the function has been entrusted to the economics
minister. A Lisbon Strategy supervisory council has been set up to co-ordinate
and control the process, as has a consulting group for the council. The council
is a co-ordinating institution aimed at ensuring that the goals of the Lisbon
Strategy are achieved in Latvia. It defines those government institutions which
are to be involved in the process, focusing on Parliament, local governments
and various social partners.14 The chairman of the council is the economics
minister, and members include 10 other ministers, three representatives of
Parliament, as well as representatives of labour unions, employers, businesses
and local government structures. The consulting group helps to design and
implement the national Lisbon programme at the interinstitutional level. The
group is chaired by the state secretary of the Ministry of Economics, and members include high-ranking civil servants from those ministries which are involved in the process.15
The European Commission evaluated Latvia’s national Lisbon programme
early in 2006 and declared various strengths in the programme. These included
a concentration on R&D and information and communications technologies,
along with reforms in these areas, steps envisaged improvement of infrastructure, and projects aimed at promoting an inclusive labour market.16 The Commission also pointed to areas in which further work is necessary – ensuring
macroeconomic stability, encouraging greater co-operation among research and
educational institutions on the one hand and businesses on the other, strengthening attempts to adapt education to the needs of the labour market, and
preparing and implementing a unified strategy on lifelong learning.
A fundamental prerequisite for the successful implementation of the Lisbon
Strategy in Latvia is political leadership and administrative capacity. Of importance here is the effective work of the supervisory council, but that has not
always been the case. On February 10, 2006, the economics minister asked colleagues to discuss proposals that had been made by the European Commission, but no other minister from among those who are responsible for the
Lisbon Strategy turned up for the discussion.17 Implementation of the strategy
could be aided by the greater involvement of other institutions and experts
who, in their work, pursue the same goals. These could include representatives of planning regions and universities, for instance. Also important in
pursuing the strategy is the ability of ministries to work together in pursuit of
the common goals.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 205

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

205

Latvia’s progress en route to Lisbon
Latvia prepared its first progress report on implementation of the national
Lisbon programme in October 2006. The authors of the report wrote that
progress in implementing the programme indicated that the defined goals
could be achieved. In 2005, Latvian GDP increased by 10.2%, and in 2006 it
rose by another 12% — more than had been forecast in the programme.
Employment figures were also much better than had been expected – unemployment dropped from 10.4% in 2004 to 8.7% in 2005, and 7.2% in the second
quarter of 2006.
The progress report also demonstrates close co-ordination between the
national Lisbon programme and the activities which are financed in part by
the EU’s Structural Funds. Approximately 67% of this money was spent on
Lisbon priorities during the 2004–2006 planning period. Priorities in the national Lisbon strategy are in line with the priorities for Structural Fund monies
during that period – balanced development, business and innovation, human
resources and employment, as well as development of rural areas and the
fishing industry. Similar synergy between the national Lisbon programme and
the Structural Funds can also be seen in the new 2007–2013 planning period. A
defined strategic goal in the Latvian National Development Plan for that period
is ‘Education and Knowledge for Economic Growth and Technological Excellence.’ The relevant priority speaks of ‘educated and creative people, technological excellence and flexibility among companies, and development of science
and research.’18 This corresponds to the Lisbon goals. Many Structural Fund
activities during the planning period are included in the National Lisbon
Programme as related projects.19 Of importance here is co-operation between
the Ministry of Economics, which is responsible for the Lisbon Strategy, and
the Ministry for Regional Development and Local Government Affairs, which
is responsible for Structural Fund financing.
In its evaluation of Latvia’s progress report, the European Commission spoke
to strengths in implementing the National Lisbon Programme – steps taken to
promote the emergence of new companies and to finance innovative small and
medium enterprises. This includes the establishment of new guarantees and a
risk capital fund, as well as a one-stop agency for those who wish to establish
a new enterprise.20 The Commission also praised progress in improving the
labour market in Latvia. When it comes to weaknesses, the Commission

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

206

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 206

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

issued three recommendations. First, it asked Latvia to ensure economic and
budget sustainability by limiting fiscal policies so as to avoid an overheating
of the economy and to select spending priorities more carefully. Second, the
Commission stressed the need for faster progress in reforming research and
innovation policies, particularly in terms of promoting co-operation between
the relevant institutions on the one hand and the business world on the other.
Third, the European Commission called for more intensive efforts to increase
the supply and productivity of labour by improving regional mobility, helping
the education system to be more in line with the needs of the labour market,
and introducing system of lifelong learning.

The Lisbon Strategy for promoting knowledge and innovation
The search for knowledge has always been at the heart
of the European adventure.
It has helped to define our identity and our values,
and it is driving force behind our future competitiveness.21

Let us now turn to one of the priorities of the Lisbon Strategy – promoting
knowledge and innovation. Schumpeter argued that the process of innovation
in its broadest sense is a driving force of capitalism, stating that ‘the fundamental impulse that sets and keeps the capitalist engine in motion comes from
the new consumers’ goods, the new methods of production or transportation,
the new markets, the new forms of industrial organisation that capitalist enterprise creates’.22 In contemporary societies, innovation and other economic
functions are best handled by market mechanism and capitalist firms,23 but in
some cases the activities of markets and firms must be complemented or corrected (but not replaced or duplicated) by instruments of public policy. There
are two prerequisites for government intervention in the field of innovation.
First, this is acceptable in those cases when markets and companies cannot
handle the function on their own, and there are problems which are not automatically resolved by market mechanisms. State support, for instance, may be
necessary if the private sector is not investing in innovation because the associated risks are too high, or if there have been problems in launching co-operation between scientists and businesses. A second reason for intervention has

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 207

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

207

to do with the administrative capabilities of government institutions in resolving
problems that have emerged in the market. The government needs information
about the situation in the market, as well as skills in dealing with problems
that occur. Otherwise public resources can be wasted. It is important to make
sure that decisions on whether intervention is necessary are based on analytical
considerations, not ideological judgements.
Innovation as a process is no longer of interest just to researchers, experts
and enthusiasts. Today it is seen as one of the main prerequisites for the successful implementation of the Lisbon Strategy at the EU and the national level.
In the spring of 2006, the European Council named investments in knowledge
and innovations as the key priority for implementing the Lisbon Strategy.24
The emergence of a Europe that is modern and friendly to innovation was also
discussed at an informal meeting of EU leaders in Lahti in October 2006.25 In
December 2006, the European Council confirmed that innovation is of decisive
importance in terms of Europe’s ability to deal effectively with the challenges
and opportunities of globalisation.26 An EU innovation strategy was approved
in September 2006.27 It lists 10 activities which are defined as particular political
priorities in the context of the Lisbon Strategy. These are: improving educational
systems; establishing a European Institute of Technology; establishing an open,
unified and competitive European labour market for researchers; transferring
knowledge between universities and research organisations and industries; supporting innovation in European regions; creating a new framework for government support for research, development and innovation; developing a new
strategy related to patents and intellectual property rights; supporting the emergence of new digital products, services and business models; offering support
to promising sectors; and offering support for innovation in public procurement.
Promoting innovation and knowledge is also a priority at the national
level. Nearly all EU Member States have declared in their National Reform
Programmes that this is the main challenge on their reform agenda.28 Latvia,
too, has declared knowledge and innovation to be a priority if sustainable
economic development is to be ensured.
An innovation gap?
Ever since the 1960s, a leitmotif for European technological efforts has been
concern that Europe lags behind the United States in terms of technological

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 208

208

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

development. America has made investments in research and development,
European scientists often move to the United States to work there, and US
companies have dominated in recently developed high-tech sectors.29 In the
1990s, there were new concerns about the supposed superiority of Japan. Even
more recently, Europe has worried about the rapid growth of China and India.
These concerns mean that when it comes to the EU’s policies vis-à-vis research,
technological development and innovation, it has traditionally been important
to try to understand Europe’s comparative weaknesses and to deal with these.
One of the most popular formulations of the problem is the concept of the
‘European paradox’, which was defined in the 1990s. The idea is that Europe
has excellent scientific foundations, as seen in academic journals, but it is far
less successful than others in using that knowledge to create new products and
economic value. This particularly applies to new technologies.30 Research that
has been conducted since then, however, even disproves the idea that the EU
has excellent scientific foundations, showing that in terms of academic publications, too, the United States surpass Europe.31
In terms of innovations, the superiority of the USA is manifested largely in
greater investments in research and development, as well as higher education.
There is also greater spending on information and communications technologies,
patents,32 as well as human capital33 (see Table 1). It has to be said, however,
that in Table 1, we also see the superiority of the EU in several areas – the number of graduates in the fields of science and engineering, business-financed
university expenditures on research and development, as well as employment
in medium-high and high-technology sectors.
Table 1

Selected comparative indicators vis-à-vis knowledge and innovation
EU-25

USA

Japan

Graduates in science and engineering
per 1,000 inhabitants aged 20–29

12.2

10.9

13.2

Enrolment in continuing education after finishing
secondary school, per 100 inhabitants aged 25–64

21.9

38.4

37.4

Government expenditure on R&D, % of GDP

0.69

0.86

0.89

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 209

209

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

EU-25

USA

Japan

Business expenditure on R&D, % of GDP

1.26

1.91

2.65

Business-financed university spending on R&D

6.6

4.5

2.7

Expenditure on information and communications
technologies

6.4

7.8

8

High-tech exports, % of all exports

17.8

26.9

22.7

Employment in medium-high, high-tech production,
% of total labour force

6.6

4.89

7.4

European Patent Bureau patents per million inhabitants

133.6

154.5

166.7

US Patent Bureau patents per million inhabitants

59.9

301.4

273.9

Triad patents (approved by US, European, Japanese
bureaus) per million inhabitants

22.3

53.6

92.6

Students, % of inhabitants aged 20–24

52

81

49

Researchers per 1,000 employed

5.5

9

9.7

Expenditure on higher education, % of GDP

1.1

2.7

1.1

Copying America?
Concerns among the shapers of EU policy vis-à-vis the knowledge and
innovation gap between the EU and America and Japan are the reason for why
several EU activities in this regard are, to a certain extend, an attempt to copy
the USA and Japan. This is seen in the stated goal of investing 3% of GDP in
research and development, in the idea of establishing the European Institute of
Technology, and in attempts to make the work of European universities more
dynamic.
After much hand-wringing about higher R&D investments in the USA and
Japan, European leaders met in Barcelona in 2002 to set the goal of ensuring
that by 2010, Europe’s investments in this area are at a level of 3% of GDP.
Moreover, two-thirds of those investments, according to the plan, are to come
from the business sector. Then the EU would catch up with the USA and draw

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

210

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 210

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

closer to Japan. As can be seen in Table 1, the EU lags behind both countries,
particularly in terms of business investments in research and development.
The EU invests less than 2% of GDP in R&D, although the situation is by no
means identical in the various EU Member States.34 In Sweden and Finland,
the goal of 3% has already been achieved, and both countries have set the goal
of boosting the level to 4% of GDP by 2010. In 10 Member States, including
Latvia, the level of spending has not even reached 1% of GDP. In pursuing the
overall goal, it is important to remember that of key importance is not just raising
investments in a quantitative sense, but also to ensure that the investments are
used as effectively as possible.
Establishing the European Institute of Technology (EIT) is one of the latest
ideas of how to reduce the innovation gap between the EU and other parts of
the world. The hope is to establish an institute which would rival the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States. European Commission
President Barroso proposed the EIT in February 2005 as part of the renewed
Lisbon Strategy.35 The aim of the EIT would be to strengthen the EU’s capacity
for innovation by integrating the highest-level processes of innovation, research
and education at an international level. The EIT would be a decentralised and
flexible networked structure, one that would be run by a board of high-level
and experienced representatives of business, research and education. There
would be six Knowledge and Innovation Communities (KICs), all related to
strategically important and interdisciplinary areas of activity. These KICs are
to be established by universities, research organisations, public and private companies, financial institutions, regional and local governments and funds. These
would all merge their human, financial and physical resources in pursuit of
the creation, dissemination and use of new knowledge.
The EIT is to launch operations in 2008, initially with 1,000 employees, 600
master’s degree students and 400 doctoral students. The European Commission has calculated that the EIT will need EUR 2.4 million in funding between
2007 and 2013. The money is to come from Member States, regional and local
governments, the private sector, the operations of the EIT itself, and the EU’s
programmes and funds. One of the main requirements for the success of this
initiative will be true interest on the part of business and research sectors.
Another area related to innovation and knowledge in which the EU is worried
about falling behind America is that of higher education and universities.36 A
larger proportion of Americans have completed their higher education, US

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 211

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

211

universities are better financed and can attract the best students and instructors from the whole world, they have more productive co-operation with the
business sector, there are better intellectual property protection, and greater
numbers of new companies are established in high-tech sectors (Table 1).
Universities are important in shaping the knowledge-based economy in terms
of education, research and innovation, but their potential has by no means been
put to full use in Europe at this time. There are plans for a series of projects
aimed at modernising universities so as to enhance their role in the emergence
of the knowledge-based society and to mobilise their investment in the pursuit
of Lisbon Strategy goals. The aim will be to increase the quality of education
and to make sure that education is more in line with the demands of the labour
market. Co-operation between academia and business will be encouraged,
and ways of ensuring better and more effective university financing will be
sought out.
There are other areas, too, in which there are direct or indirect attempts to
copy the United States. This applies to intellectual property rights and the establishment of accessible Community patent.37 The innovation gap between
the EU and the USA can, to a large extent, be attributed to the fact that the
United States post much better indicators in the area of patents.
How can one evaluate the EU’s effort to catch up with the United States
and to bridge the innovation gap? Certainly, it is a good thing that the EU is
evaluating and analysing American experience and learning from it. At the
same time, however, catching up with the USA is not a goal in and of itself. EU
policy makers should not try to copy the United States blindly. Critical assessment is needed to determine those parts of the American experience that are
appropriate for the EU and those which are not necessary. It is also true that
Asian countries, particularly China and India, are becoming stronger and
stronger, and the United States are concerned about competition from those
countries, too.
Moreover, some EU Member States such as Sweden and Finland are ahead
of the United States in terms of some aspects of innovation.38 This suggests
that it might be of greater use for the EU to take a look at successes in its own
Member States than to try to catch up with the USA at all costs.39

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

212

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 212

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

Is Europe innovation-friendly?
There have been many different explanations as to why processes of innovation are not as active in Europe as they are elsewhere in the world. One popular
idea is that innovation is more active in the United States because the state’s
role in the national economy is lesser there. This is not a convincing argument,
because even though there are many claims about the supposedly minimal
role of the American government in the country’s economy, the fact is that
government financing for R&D is higher there than in the EU (Table 1). There
are mechanisms via which government support is provided for research and
development, such as the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programme.40
In comparing the situation with innovation in the USA and the EU, therefore, we can say that the EU problem is not an excessive state role in research
and innovation, but the problem is insufficient businesses involvement in this
process. In the United States, in addition to a greater state role, there is also
much more extensive business participation in R&D. One of the main issues
for the EU, therefore, is to achieve greater business participation in this area.
Consensus has been reached on the idea that the priority is to set up a framework for businesses which promotes innovation. Requirements include open
markets, appropriate regimes to protect intellectual property rights and patents,
as well as availability of venture capital.41
At the same time, when we compare the situation with innovation in the
USA and the EU, we must also consider the different economic profiles of the
two regions, as well as their comparative advantages and disadvantages.
Long-term analysis of data related to patents, for instance, shows that German
companies have comparative advantages in such areas as mechanical engineering, transportation, consumer goods and automobiles.42 These are sectors
in which innovation appears incrementally and gradually in terms of improvements to processes and products. The comparative advantages enjoyed by
American companies are found in such sectors as medical engineering, biotechnologies and information and communications technologies. All of these
are areas in which radical innovation is not uncommon. The difference between
the USA and the EU, in other words, is based not only on the possibility that
the United States are superior to the European Union, but also on the fact that
each region has its own comparative advantages and areas of specialisation.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 213

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

213

There is another issue, however, if we think about what hinders the process
of innovation in Europe. Could it be that the values, culture and mentality of
Europeans simply do not promote innovation? Public values and attitudes are
of particular importance, because the process of innovation means questioning
the status quo. Innovation is uncertain, it involves search, risk and experimentation.43 Innovation often is a process of trial and error, and that is why societies
in which innovation occurs must be open to change, they must be able to undertake risk, be tolerant vis-à-vis experiments and failures, etc.
Another commonly heard explanations as to why innovation is at an insufficient level in Europe is that public culture and attitudes do not support change
and risk. Micossi argues that a dynamic economy with innovation requires an
economic environment and institutions, as well as cultural values and attitudes,
which offer powerful stimuli for change and promote openness to new players
and new experiments in business.44 Innovation needs an open and dynamic
economic environment which is full of ambitions, competition, self-help and
initiative. It is important, moreover, for the public, along with financial and
legal institutions, to support the risks that are involved. Innovation often proves
unsuccessful, and it is important to make sure that failures in business do not
create major financial or economic problems which cause society to stigmatise
the whole process of innovation. When there are successes, in turn, society
must be prepared to accept the fact that successful experimenters often earn a
great deal of money.
Micossi argues that corporate institutions which have emerged historically
on the European continent have established an economic environment and a
set of cultural values which do not encourage competition. The governing attitude in Europe, he says, is that an individual’s economic position is a matter of
good fortune, contacts or inheritance, not his or her capacities and initiative.
This is an environment in which individuals do not believe in their own abilities.
There are also suspicious attitudes in many European countries vis-à-vis big
profits, particularly when these are divided up under legal or political protection.
Too often this is the case in Europe. Micossi compares Europe, where individuals
are dependent upon and concerned about their status, to the self-reliant culture
in America, where there are family values and efforts to promote education.
The bottom line is that a serious move toward innovation in Europe is not
going to be possible without long-term changes in economic institutions and
public values alike.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

214

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 214

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

The openness of societies vis-à-vis innovation and the spirit of innovation in
the business sector – these are the areas in which Europe really can learn from
the USA. EU policy documents now stress the need to understand that innovation is an important public value.45 This is an area, however, in which political
activities will not be enough – societies must be open to change, people must
understand the problems which prevail and be prepared to change.
It cannot be said, however, that attitudes vis-à-vis innovation are identical
in all of Europe. There are some Member States which are more open to it,
while others are more sceptical. The Eurobarometer survey has asked people
about innovation, its importance, and new products and services, dividing
respondents up into four groups – ‘anti-innovation’, ‘reluctant’, ‘attracted’,
and ‘enthusiasts’.46 The survey found that 11% of EU residents, on average, are
enthusiasts, 39% are attracted, 33% are reluctant, and 16% oppose innovation.
The greatest percentage of enthusiasts and attracted respondents were found
in Malta, Slovakia, Italy, France and Slovenia. Other countries in which support
for innovation was higher than the EU average were Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Sweden, the Czech Republic, Ireland, the United Kingdom, Belgium,
Denmark and Hungary. The lowest level of support for innovation was found
in Poland and Latvia, where more than 60% of respondents are either opponents (16–17%) or reluctant about innovation (45–47%). Comparatively higher
percentages of opponents are also found in Germany, Greece, Cyprus, Portugal and Spain (20% or so). Interestingly, Finland is one of the countries which
has done very well in terms of innovation, but even there public attitudes are
cautious – 46% of respondents are reluctant, and 13% oppose innovation.
Data about public attitudes show that despite the fact that the discourse of
European political leaders currently presents innovation as a key priority and
need for long-term socio-economic development, many people in Europe are
not yet convinced that innovation is a good thing. Many people are conservative, they have biases, concerns and a lack of understanding. This means that
there must be a broader discussion about the goals and benefits of innovation,
as well as public needs and expectations vis-à-vis these processes. Otherwise
ideas about how to promote innovation will remain an elite process with
questionable public support.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 215

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

215

Challenges in the development of knowledge
and innovation in Europe and Latvia
Europe has to become a truly knowledge-based and innovation-friendly society where innovation is not feared by
the public but welcomed, is not hindered but encouraged, and where it is part of the core societal values and
understood to work for the benefit of all its citizens.47
Successful promotion of knowledge and innovation must be based on a
system in which policy makers have a good understanding and systematic approach to these issues. In public debate, the concept of innovation is often
simplified or narrowed. People associate it only with high-tech manufacturing,
information and communications technologies, or specific and well known
locations such as Silicon Valley in the United States. Policy must not be based
on common stereotypes and myths about innovation. Instead, there must be a
complex approach to the role of innovation in socio-economic development.
The specific situation and needs of each Member State must also be taken into
account when innovation policies are designed. The level of innovation differs
a great deal from one EU Member State to the next, so the transfer of experience
from one country to another must be a very careful process. Each time there
must be consideration of whether one country’s experience will be in line with
another country’s national situation. Comparative research shows that the new
Member States are quite far behind in the area of innovation.48 Calculations
show that Hungary and Slovenia will need 10 years to catch up with the EU average, Lithuania and the Czech Republic will need more than 20 years, Latvia
will require nearly 40 years, and Poland and Slovakia will need 50 years or more.
These forecasts, of course, must be accepted with a grain of salt, because it is
practically impossible to predict future developments with any precision. Still,
the data do show that there is a significant innovation gap within the EU. This
also indicates that solutions which are successful in the older and far more
technologically advanced EU Member States will not always be appropriate
for the developmental needs of the newer Member States.
Let us now look at three challenges in the area of innovation policy – ones
that are important for the EU as a whole and, particularly, for Latvia. First of
all, it is important to make sure that all groups in society and all sectors of the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

216

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 216

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

economy benefit from the development of innovation. Secondly, promoting
innovation is a complex issue, it must not be based on just a few prestigious
projects. Thirdly, there must be an all-encompassing strategy to promote investment, as opposed to mechanical increases in financing alone.
Benefits for all groups in society and all economic sectors
One of the dangerous trends in the development of a knowledge-based
economy and the relevant innovation policies is that countries get too carried
away with high technologies. Policies aimed at high-tech development will
affect only small segments of national economies and societies, and might
promote polarisation in society. High-tech sectors are important, of course, but
policy must promote innovation in low and medium-technology sectors, too.
These represent approximately 90% of economic activity in Europe at this
time.49 Low and medium-tech sectors such as furniture manufacturing, textiles,
food production, etc., are open for innovation, as their major segments of sales
volume are made up of new and technologically improved products. These
sectors also use high-level design skills, engineering skills and scientific services.
It may be that the medium and low-tech sectors will continue to play a great
role in the European economy of the future.
Excessive focus on high technologies is particularly dangerous in the new
EU Member States, because it diverts the attention of policy-makers from other,
more important economic issues such as developing the capacity for innovation
among companies in all sectors of the economy.50 Most of the new EU Member
States have said that their national priorities include biotechnology, material
technologies and information and communications technologies. They have
argued that their priorities are in line with priorities in the EU programmes.51
This approach means that policies are focused on a small group of large
companies, leaving other, mostly small and medium-sized companies on the
back burner.
Researchers are sceptical about the plans of new Member States to base
their economic growth on high-tech sectors. This worked in Eastern Asia,
where there was rapid development thanks to these sectors, but that does not
mean that countries in Central and Eastern Europe will be able to repeat that
strategy today.52 Researchers point to two major reasons to question the importance of high technologies in the development of Central and Eastern

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 217

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

217

European countries. First of all, high-tech sectors play a relatively small economic role in terms of employment and output – even in Western Europe, the
proportion is only around 8% or so. This means that it is far more important to
ensure increased productivity in the entire national economy. Secondly, there
is severe competition in high-technology sectors, and it is very hard for new
entrants into the market to conquer any heights therein. This requires enormous
investments, and profits are not always immediate or substantial. Researchers
recommend that thought instead be given to the use of technologies in all
sectors of the economy.
Also important in modern-day economies is to overcome traditional stereotypes which say that innovation and the use of technologies apply only to the
manufacturing sector. It is no less important to promote innovation in service
sectors, too. This is very important in Latvia, where the service sector plays a
very important role in the national economy. Documents related to innovation,
such as the National Innovation Programme for 2003–2006, have never focused
enough attention on the issue of innovation in the service sector.
It is also important to remember that in addition to technological innovations, there must be non-technological innovations such as changes in business
models, improvements in design, and organisation of processes.53 Technological
and non-technological innovations must support one another in pursuit of
economic development.
A complex approach, not just prestigious projects
Another risk in the development of a knowledge-based economy is that
politicians and society can be concentrated on specific prestigious projects, as
opposed to a more complex approach toward promoting innovation. An example is the idea of promoting Rîga as a potential site for the European Institute of Technology.54 This is an idea which should be treated very cautiously,
because there must be a proper evaluation of the costs and benefits of the plan,
given the existing situation with innovation in Latvia. Among the 25 EU Member States before Romania’s and Bulgaria’s accession, Latvia was in penultimate place (24th) on the European Innovation Scoreboard.55 Only 17.5% of
companies in Latvia are innovative, while on average of 45% of enterprises are
innovative in the EU as a whole.56 In this situation, the priority must be the
establishment of innovative capacities in companies and the removal of any

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

218

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 218

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

obstacles against innovation in the national economy. There could be very few
benefits from the establishment of the European Institute of Technology in
Rîga, because the abilities of the local business sector to gain benefits from an
institute of such importance could be quite limited at this time. If the institute
were to be sited in Latvia, it might resemble a ‘cathedral in the desert’ – one
which has quite little to do with local socio-economic development.
Although the attention of the mass media and of politicians is often attracted by elite and prestigious knowledge economy projects which make use
of high technologies and modern laboratories, the fact is that promoting innovation is really a prosaic process of everyday work. The innovative capacities of
the business sector must be developed gradually, and obstacles against the
process of innovation – shortages of finances, human resources and information, bothersome business regulations, etc. – must be removed.
An all-encompassing strategy,
as opposed to purely mechanical increases in financing
An important component in the Lisbon Strategy is to increase R&D financing
to 3% of GDP by 2010. This has been very significant in Latvia, because the
goal has focused the attention of politicians on research and development
financing – an issue which had largely been ignored ever since the early 1990s.
Owing to the 3% objective that has been set by the EU (1% must come from the
state budget), Latvia’s Law on Research Activity (2005) states that each year,
financing for research activity must increase by at least 0.15% of GDP until the
level of 1% of GDP is reached. Accordingly, financing for R&D has increased in
recent years, and many important activities have been launched. Institutional
funding for research institutes has been established, funding for research activities at higher education establishments has been increased, etc.
Many researchers, however, have argued that mechanical increases in financing to a set goal will not ensure results in and of themselves.57 Increased
financing is more effective if it is part of a broader strategy, one in which political goals and activities aimed at pursuing those goals are defined systematically. Criteria must be elaborated for the evaluation of achievements and the
return on investments. The Law on Research Activity states that Parliament
must approve a 10-year national strategy for science and technology, but two
years on, that has not yet been done. In June 2006, the Committee of the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 219

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

219

Cabinet of Ministers reviewed a draft proposal for Guidelines for Development of Science and Technology for 2006–2013, mandating the Ministry of
Education and Science to prepare a relevant strategy.58 Public debates of such
documents would make it possible for the public at large to be involved in the
debate over the goals and expected results of scientific and technological
development. It would also be easier for the government to explain to taxpayers how their taxes are being used to support research activities as part of a
broader strategy for the development of science and technology, to explain
what kind of return can be expected for those investments.
Political leadership is of key importance if an effective strategy is to be
prepared and implemented. The draft Guidelines envisage an institution for
consultation and co-ordination – the Strategic Council on Scientific and Technological Development would be chaired by the prime minister, and it would
be analogous to similar institutions in many other European countries. There
must be co-operation between the Ministry of Economics, which is responsible
for innovation policy, and the Ministry of Education and Science, which is
responsible for research policy. In the context of strengthening administrative
capacity, a positive thing here is the establishment of the Department of
Knowledge and Innovation Systems at the Latvian Investment and Development Agency in 2006. The department administers all government aid in this
area, analyses the effectiveness of innovation system and innovation support
instruments, etc.59

Summary: pre-conditions for successful implementation
of the Lisbon Strategy
The Lisbon Strategy is also important for growth and employment in that it
helps to attract the attention of political leaders to important aspects of socioeconomic development. The issues are given greater priority, and financial and
human resources are mobilised in pursuit of solutions. Planned and launched
reforms can only be successful if they are supported by businesses and the
public. Here are a few important conclusions about the implementation of the
Lisbon Strategy in the final stages of its development so as to promote knowledge and innovation in Europe and Latvia.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

220

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 220

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

During the nearly seven years which have passed since the implementation
of the strategy, the process has moved from generalised political declarations to many specific reform processes with implementation frameworks
and instruments. Since the renewal of the strategy in 2005, it has become
more pragmatic. During the final years of its implementation, it will be
important to evaluate the renewed strategy in 2008, as well as decisions
that have been taken at the European and the national level. Latvia will
have to develop its own positions vis-à-vis national needs and priorities.
■ Some of the goals of the strategy – promoting knowledge and innovation,
for instance – are long-term in nature. High-level political campaigns can
produce a significant stimulus for such processes, but they will not be
adequate in the long run. Thought must be given to what will happen with
these processes after the Lisbon Strategy is closed out in 2010.
■ Ongoing monitoring of progress is necessary so as to evaluate the reforms and achievements. It must be remembered, however, that some of
the reforms – investments in education and research, for instance – will
only produce economic results after a longer period of time.
■ Effective political leadership and administrative capacity are essential for
successful implementation of reform, and that applies to the European
and the national level. Fortunately, this strategy is being implemented not
just by political leaders and administrative officials, but also by their social
partners and local government representatives. The range of people who
are involved could be expanded even further, bringing in representatives
of regions and of universities. The strategy involves a great many processes, and co-operation among various institutions is most important in
doing the work. Given the close synergy between the Lisbon Strategy and
the EU’s Structural Funds, it is particularly important to ensure co-ordination among the institutions which are responsible for these areas.
■ One of the European and national priorities in pursuit of the Lisbon Strategy is to promote knowledge and innovation, and although this used to be
the provenance of just a few experts and enthusiasts, it is now a priority
that has received the blessing of political leaders. This is no less of a priority
in Latvia if long-term economic growth is to be secured and if the country is
to move from a labour-intensive to a knowledge-intensive economy.
■ The EU has a lot to learn from the United States when it comes to knowledge and innovation, but this must be a cautious process in that not all
■

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 221

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

221

‘success stories’ from the USA will be appropriate for the European situation. Moreover, catching up with the United States must not be the main
goal or purpose. Europe must also monitor development in the rapidly
growing economies of Asia, as well as analyse the experience of its own
most innovative countries – Sweden and Finland. These are two countries
which surpass the USA in terms of many indicators of innovation.
■ Of great importance in the realm of innovation is to ensure that members
of the public are open to and supportive of experiments and risks. Sociological research shows that at a time when innovation is clearly a priority
in the discourse of European political leaders, many people are still quite
hesitant about this. There is a need for a broader discussion of public
opinion, needs and expectations vis-à-vis innovation, so that support for
innovation is not just an elite process with questionable support on the
part of society. This is important in Latvia, where a comparatively large
share of survey respondents are reluctant vis-à-vis innovation.
■ Indicators of innovation show that there are great differences among EU
Member States in this regard, and a long time will be needed before new
Member States reach even the EU average. The great gap between certain
countries and others makes it clear that each country must look for solutions
that are appropriate to its own situation and its own needs.
■ When providing support for innovation, it is risky to concentrate on support only for high technologies, because these represent a small share of
national economies and affect a very small share of society. Concentration
on high technologies alone can foment socio-economic polarisation. It is
important to promote innovation in low and medium-technology sectors
and in the service sector if innovation is to serve the interests of the entire
national economy and society. It is also important to remember that nontechnological innovations in such areas as work organisation, design,
marketing, etc., are equally important.
■ Similarly, the knowledge society cannot emerge if there is a concentration
only on prestigious technological projects. In Latvia, it is far more important to develop the capacity of innovation gradually and in all sectors of
the economy, particularly at small and medium enterprises. There must
also be a systemic approach to eliminating obstacles against innovation –
a lack of finances, specialists and information, hindering business regulations, etc.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 222

222
■

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

The Lisbon Strategy has led to greater focus on R&D funding which had
been on the back burner for far too long. However, mechanical increases
in financing will not be enough to promote knowledge and innovation.
Increased investments will yield only limited results if they are not a part
of an all-encompassing strategy to develop knowledge and innovation –
a strategy with clearly defined goals, achievable results, a systematic set
of projects to be pursued, and a set of clear criteria on the basis of which
the effectiveness of the investments can be evaluated.

References and notes
1 Presidency Conclusions. Lisbon European Council, 23 and 24 March 2000.
2 For more on this, see Borras, S. and Greeve, B. (guest ed.). Journal of European Public Policy,

Vol. 11, No. 2, April 2004. Special issue ‘The Open Method of Coordination’.
3 European Commission. Working Together for Growth and Jobs: A New Start for the

Lisbon Strategy. Communication to the Spring European Council COM (2005) 24, 2
February 2005.
4 European Commission. Common Actions for Growth and Employment: The Community
Lisbon Programme. Communication from the Commission to the Council and the
European Parliament, COM (2005) 330, 20.07.2005.
5 European Commission. Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs (2005–2008), COM
(2005) 141, 12.4.2005.
6 Presidency Conclusions. Brussels: European Council, 23 and 24 March 2006.
7 European Commission. Cohesion Policy in Support of Growth and Jobs: Community
Strategic Guidelines, 2007–2013, COM (2005) 299, 5 July 2005.
8 European Commission. Implementing the Renewed Lisbon Strategy for Growth and
Jobs: A Year of Delivery. Communication from the Commission to the Spring European
Council. 12 December 2006.
9 Here and hereafter: European Commission. Implementing the Renewed Lisbon Strategy
for Growth and Jobs: A Year of Delivery. Communication from the Commission to the
Spring European Council. 12 December 2006.
10 Presidency Conclusions. Barcelona: European Council, 15 and 16 May 2002.
11 Gelauff, G. and Lejour, A. (2006). The New Lisbon Strategy. An Estimation of the Economic Impact of Reaching Five Lisbon Targets. Industrial Policy and Economic Reforms
Papers, No. 1. European Commission: Enterprise and Industry Directorate-General. See also
European Commission. The Economic Costs of Non-Lisbon. Commission Staff Working
Paper. 8 March 2005.
12 National Lisbon Programme of Latvia for 2005–2008. Latvia 2005.
13 Report on Progress in Implementation of the National Lisbon Programme of Latvia for
2005–2008. Rîga, October 2006.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 223

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

223

14 Cabinet of Ministers Regulation No. 583, Statutes of the Lisbon Strategy Supervisory

Council, 2 August 2005.
15 Report on Progress in Implementation of the National Lisbon Programme of Latvia for

2005–2008. Rîga, October 2006.
16 European Commission. Time to Move Up a Gear. Communication from the Commission

to the Spring European Council, Country chapters, PART II to COM 2006, 30, 25 January 2006.
17 Press release from the Ministry of Economics on the meeting of the Lisbon Strategy

supervisory council. 10 February 2006.
18 Latvian National Development Plan 2007–2013. Ministry for Regional Development and

Local Government Affairs, 2006.
19 Report on Progress in Implementation of the National Lisbon Programme of Latvia for

2005–2008. Rîga, October 2006.
20 European Commission. Implementing the Renewed Lisbon Strategy for Growth and

Jobs. A Year of Delivery. Communication from the Commission to the Spring European
Council, Part II, Assessment of Progress Made by Each Member State. 12 December 2006.
21 European Commission. Working Together for Growth and Jobs. A New Start for the
Lisbon Strategy. Communication to the Spring European Council COM (2005)2. 2 February 2005.
22 Schumpeter, J. A. (1975) Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Grand Rapids: Harper Torchbooks, p. 83.
23 Here and hereafter, Edquist, C. Innovation Policy – a Systemic Approach. In: Archibugi,
D. and Lundvall, B-A. (eds.). The Globalising Learning Economy. Oxford University Press,
pp. 219–238.
24 Presidency Conclusions. Brussels: European Council, 23 and 24 March 2006.
25 European Commission. An Innovation-Friendly, Modern Europe. Communication from
the Commission to the European Council (informal meeting in Lahti, Finland, 20 October
2006), COM (2006)589, 12 October 2006.
26 Presidency Conclusions. Brussels: European Council, 23 and 24 March 2006.
27 European Commission. Putting Knowledge Into Practice: A Broad-Based Innovation
Strategy for the EU, COM (2006) 502, 13 September 2006.
28 European Commission. Implementing the Renewed Lisbon Strategy for Growth and
Jobs. A Year of Delivery. Communication from the Commission to the Spring European
Council, Part II, Assessment of Progress Made by Each Member State. 12 December 2006.
29 Banchoff, T. Institutions, Inertia and European Union Research Policy. Journal of Common
Market Studies, Vol. 40, No. 1, 2002, p. 7.
30 European Commission. Green Paper on Innovation, COM (95) 688. Bulletin of the European
Union, Supplement 5/95.
31 Dosi, G., Llerna, P. and Labini, M. S. (2005). Evaluating and Comparing the Innovation
Performance of the United States and the European Union. www.trendchart.org.
32 Here and hereafter, European Innovation Scoreboard 2005. Comparative Analysis of
Innovation Performance. www.trendchart.org.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

224

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 224

INGA ULNICÂNE-OZOLIÒA

33 European Commission. Mobilising the Brainpower of Europe: Enabling Universities to

Make Their Full Contribution to the Lisbon Strategy, COM (2005) 152, 20 April 2005.
34 Here and hereafter, European Commission. Implementing the Renewed…, op. cit.
35 Here and hereafter, European Commission. Proposal for a Regulation of the European

Parliament and the Council Establishing the European Institute of Technology, COM
(2006) 604, 18 October 2006.
36 See, e.g., European Commission. Mobilising the Brainpower…, op. cit. See also European
Commission. Delivering on the Modernisation Agenda for Universities: Education,
Research and Innovation, COM (2006) 2008, 10 May 2006.
37 See, e.g., European Commission. An Innovation-Friendly…, op. cit.
38 European Innovation Scoreboard 2005. Comparative Analysis of Innovation Performance.
39 Lundvall, B-A. and Tomlinson, M. International Benchmarking as a Policy Learning Tool.
In: Rodrigues, M.J. (ed.). (2002) The New Knowledge Economy in Europe: A Strategy for
International Competitiveness and Social Cohesion, p. 227.
40 Etkowitz, H. Public Venture Capital: The Secret Life of US Science Policy. In: Biegelbauer,
P. and Borras, S. (Eds.). (2003) Innovation Policies in Europe and the US: The New Agenda.
Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 43–59.
41 Boekholt, P. and Giessel, J-F. The Innovation Gap Between the EU & the US: Myth or
Reality? Workshop Background Paper, Trend Chart Policy Workshop, Brussels, 15–16 November 2005.
42 Hall, P. and D. Soskice, D. An Introduction to Varieties of Capitalism. In: Hall, P. and
Soskice, D. (eds.). (2001) Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative
Advantage. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 41–44.
43 Rosenberg, N. and Birzell, L. E. (1986) How the West Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation
of the Industrial World. New York: Basic Book.
44 Here and hereafter, Micossi, S. Economic Values and Dynamism in the EU Economy.
CEPS Policy Brief, No. 64, February 2005.
45 European Commission. Putting Knowledge…, op. cit.
46 European Commission. Population Innovation Readiness. Special Eurobarometer survey,
2005.
47 European Commission. Putting Knowledge…, op. cit.
48 Here and hereafter, European Innovation Scoreboard 2005. Comparative Analysis of
Innovation Performance. www.trendchart.org.
49 Here and hereafter, Hirsch-Kreinsen, H., Jacobson, D., Laestadius, S. and Smith, K. LowTech Industries and the Knowledge Economy: State of the Art and Research Challenges.
Paper written for the research project ‘PILOT: Policy and Innovation in Low-Tech’.
www.pilot-project.org, 2003.
50 Havas, A. Knowledge-Intensive Activities vs. High-Tech Sectors: Learning Options and
Traps for Central European Policy-Makers. In: Piech, K. and Radosevic, S. (eds.). (2006)
Knowledge Based Economy in Countries of Central and Eastern Europe: Countries and Sectors in
Process of Change. Palgrave.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 225

The Lisbon Strategy for Promoting Knowledge and Innovation

225

51 Radosevic, S. and Reid, A. Innovation Policy for a Knowledge-Based Economy in Central

and Eastern Europe: Driver of Growth or New Layer of Bureaucracy?. In: Ibid.
52 Here and hereafter, Tunzelmann, N., von and Nassehi, S. Technology Policy, European

Union Enlargement, and Economic, Social and Political Sustainability. Science and Public
Policy, Vol. 31, No. 6, 2004, p. 478.
53 European Commission. An Innovation-Friendly…, op. cit.
54 See, e.g., Diena, 27 February 2006 and 18 October 2006.
55 European Innovation Scoreboard 2005. Comparative Analysis of Innovation Performance.
56 Central Statistical Board of Latvia. Statistics on Research and Innovations. Rîga, 2006.
57 See, e.g., Tunzelmann, N.,von and Sassehi, S. Technology Policy…, op. cit.
58 Minutes of the Cabinet of the Cabinet of Ministers, No. 21, 5 June 2006, Draft ‘Guidelines
for Development of Science and Technology for 2006–2013’.
59 Report on Progress in Implementation of the National Lisbon Programme of Latvia for
2005–2008. Rîga, October 2006.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 226

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ,
GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

The European Union’s Common Foreign
and Security Policy in the Crossfire,
though not at the Crossroads, of Values and Interests1
The Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) of the European Union
(henceforth also the EU or the Union) has, in recent years, become a point of
reference when measuring and evaluating the successes and failures of the
integration of Europe. Judging from their statements, the views of EU representatives are characterised by delight, even astonishment, over the accomplishments in the various areas of the CFSP. In contrast, the views of politicians
and experts in EU Member States are tinged with pessimism reflecting their
dissatisfaction with the difficult process of reaching consensus on issues of
crucial importance for Europe.
A casual observer, regarding this EU policy from the sidelines, may become
confused when faced with the plethora of contradictory statements and arguments concerning the CFSP. Such confusion could dissipate when it is recognised
that the current situation is rooted in a long-standing paradox, which will
continue to exist in the future. That paradox stems, on the one hand, from the
unwillingness of Member States to give up important attributes of their sovereignty (such as their own foreign, security and defence policies) and, on the
other hand, from their wish to take full advantage of the benefits offered by
acting in concord with the Union. The interests of Member States are well
served if important policy decisions regarding the external international environment are co-ordinated at the EU level, because when the Union can act as a
united political entity, it has greater impact on global developments than do all
the Member States when they act individually. That is why most of them affirm
their readiness to develop the CFSP further. Nonetheless, as soon as it is necessary to act in this direction, each step is reassessed against the national interests

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 227

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

227

and then the decision-making becomes complicated. The contradictory aspects
of this policy are also evident in the juxtaposition therein of values and interests.
The explanation for this lies in history, interests of international organisations
and of Member States, and European integration.
That is why this chapter will be devoted to delineating the principal trends
and clarifying the salient issues and their interrelatedness. This, in turn, should
help define Latvia’s position toward the CFSP. First, we shall outline those
historical trends which led to the development of the CFSP and affect the
current situation in the area of foreign and security policy. Then we shall
examine the list of European values, which have been proposed and discussed
by Ivars Ijabs2, in the broader context of the CFSP. In the third section, we shall
consider the attitudes of various EU Member States toward the CFSP and seek
to identify those interests which overlap and those which differ from state to
state. We shall also seek to determine the extent to which each country’s position
includes the component of values. This, in turn, will help us to draw broader
conclusions about the relationship between values and interests. In the fourth
section, we shall offer a case study about values and interests as components
of the EU Neighbourhood Policy. In conclusion, we shall focus on the problematic aspects of the CFSP which are relevant for Latvia.

1. The EU Common Foreign and Security Policy
from a historical perspective
The ongoing integration of Europe started in the wake of the Second World
War. The paradoxical elements of the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy
today stem from the post-World War II historical experience of the EU original
Member States. Moreover, the problems attributed to the diverse and often
ambiguous attitudes of EU Member States today toward the CFSP have
emerged over a longer period of time, not just in the last few years. The fact
that the states are moving cautiously toward such a common policy should
not be attributed solely to the divergent views on the war in Iraq; it should be
regarded as one of many examples of a historically grounded phenomenon
that integration of foreign and defence policy has and will continue to serve as
an instrument for achieving the policies and securing the defence of individual
states. Agreement on consolidated action can be achieved only when it does

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

228

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 228

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

not encroach upon the national interests of the states involved. Thus, the CFSP,
per se, and the values that it embodies are of secondary importance.
This observation is corroborated by several important turning points in the
history of the EU. The Maastricht Treaty of 1993 was the first document to talk
about CFSP and lay the legal foundations for that policy. However, we shall
not consider this treaty as the principal reference point in this endeavour,
because our aim is not to investigate the juridical basis of this policy. Our focus
will be on the relationship of values and interests in the formulation of foreign
and defence policies. What is more, foreign and security policy issues have
been omnipresent throughout course of EU development and the process of
European integration, even when they have not been noted in official treaties.
The main impulse for the integration of European states was the wish to
avoid new wars, avoid violence in dealing with common affairs, and prevent
the rebirth of revanchist sentiments in Europe. After the Second World War,
the European states did not seek to exclude potential aggressors, as had been
the case with Germany at the end of World War I. Instead, they opted for policies
of engagement which encouraged the bringing of former adversaries into the
European processes and co-operation with them.
Security considerations had much to do with the development of post-war
Europe, as did the plans for economic restoration. The Marshall Plan of the
United States laid the foundation for economic co-operation among European
countries. The desire of the USSR to strengthen its presence on the Continent
encouraged the establishment of security organisations. The Treaty of Brussels
of 1948 led to the creation of the first collective defence structure3: the Western
European Union, which was established in 1955. As the Cold War intensified
and the Europeans saw that they could not adequately counter the influence of
the USSR in Europe, the United States of America and the European democracies decided to establish in 1949 the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO),
a structure endowed with the necessary military capacity and arsenal for collective defence.
In 1950, despite the recent founding of the two aforementioned organisations,
France proposed the establishment of the European Defence Community (EDC),
which would be based on sectoral integration, a fundamental principle of the
European Coal and Steel Community. France’s Prime Minister, René Pleven,
hoped that by bringing the Federal Republic of Germany into the new alliance
the threat posed by the Soviet Union would be reduced; at the same time, this

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 229

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

229

would ensure control over the FRG in the military realm. Thus, the proverbial
two birds would be killed with one stone. The EDC treaty was signed with much
fanfare in 1952. However, after a change of government in France in 1954, the
country’s Parliament rejected the treaty because the parliamentarians did not
wish supranational structures to decide their country’s security and defence
issues. These events – the creation of the EDC and its subsequent fate – illustrate
how interests can supersede values and how contradictory stances have afflicted the EU in its own development.4
The rejection of the EDC treaty had a serious effect on the course of European integration. Until 1970, the Member States of the European Communities
(EC) focused on achieving a common market and economic integration moved
forward successfully. They avoided both discussions and co-ordination of
foreign and security policy issues and excluded these topics from the agenda.
However, as economic integration progressed, co-operation in the political
realm became an inevitable consequence. To a certain extent, this process was
accelerated with the EC decision to admit new members: Denmark, the UK
and Ireland. In 1970 the EC foreign ministers drafted a report in which they
called for co-operation in those areas where there was the greatest convergence
of opinions. Foreign policy was listed as one such area, and a consultative
mechanism, the European Political Co-operation (EPC), was established for
the exchange and co-ordination of views. While the EPC could be considered
as a stepping stone toward the CFSP, it is only a feeble reflection of the ambitious intentions of the EDC of 1950.
At the same time, it appears that the maturation process, which occurred
between the years 1950 and 1993, was necessary for the European states so as
to progress from consultations and harmonisation of views to the CFSP. The
following figures illustrate the fact that at first Member States were very reserved about discussing and resolving foreign policy issues and that only
gradually did they come around to dealing with these issues together and
supporting a common policy. As has been documented by Michael Smith,
Member States reached agreement on eight common positions and projects
between 1970 and 1974, on seven between 1975 and 1979, on 24 between 1980
and 1984, on 26 between 1985 and 1989, and on 94 between 1990 and 1995.5 If
it took the EU 43 years to reach agreement on common activities, then it should
come as no surprise that among the four instruments of the CFSP, the ones
which are the most highly developed are those which speak to guidelines,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

230

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 230

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

common strategies and common positions, where the emphasis is on common
values, rather than on common actions which would entail taking into account
the national interests of individual states. A vivid example of this phenomenon
is the unanimity of EU Member States when the Union’s common strategy on
relations with Russia was approved. The implementation of these principles,
however, depends on actions emanating from specific policies based on a country’s
national interests in different areas (energy supply, nuclear safety, environmental
protection, bilateral partnership in a global context) rather than on values (human
rights, rule of law, democracy, market economy, civil society, etc.) which, in this
context, could hinder the achievement of specific goals.6
The developmental process of the CFSP is marked by another tendency
which in the 21st century is becoming more and more evident on account of its
contradictory elements. When the EPC was launched, Member States of the
European Communities agreed on the issues deserving greater attention. These
represented a symbiosis of interests and values. For instance, the assistance
programmes developed as part of the development co-operation with the
countries of Africa; they were influenced by a mixture of sentiments consisting
of a sense of responsibility for post-colonial countries and a values-based
desire to enhance welfare, security and peace in a region with which many
European countries had historical ties. The development of co-operation with
the countries of the Mediterranean Sea region is also very directly linked to the
close interaction between interests and values. The EC strengthened relations
with international institutions such as the United Nations, the Council of Europe
and the CSCE/OSCE and thus proved that Member States were moving away
from the classical paradigm of realism in international relations – a paradigm
based on national interests. In effect, by supporting universal human values at
the global level the EC was moving toward liberalism.
Up to the conclusion of the Maastricht Treaty, the EU Member States managed to preserve a balance between interests and values in foreign and security
policy without having an official common policy in this area since activities
outside the EC occurred in regions and countries which could be seen as part
of the proximate environs. When the EU announced the CFSP, which represented
the Union’s aim of becoming a major player in the international arena and
speaking with one voice, no testing had been done of the Union’s ability to act
in regions and countries with which there had been no previous longer-term ties
or economic contacts. This applies also to foreign policy activities heretofore

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 231

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

231

atypical for the Union. This basic failing was painfully evident from the EU’s
inability to deal with violence in a neighbouring region when the wars of the
former Yugoslavia broke out.

2. An assessment of values:
which are the values exemplifying the CFSP?
In view of the trends in the historical development of European integration,
it is clear that foreign and security policy concerns of Member States are not to
be isolated from the framework of values which contributed to the development of a common platform for internal policies and a European view of the
international setting. The powerful presence of values in the representation of
the individual interests of Member States in Europe and beyond its borders
has served as a counterweight between ‘the good and the necessary.’7 The
contributing authors of this compilation would like, however, to emphasise
those values, as identified by Ijabs, which, regardless of time, Member States’
interests, or international events, continue to be relevant in the ongoing debate
about the future of the CFSP:
Citizenship. At first glance, citizenship may seem unimportant. Nonetheless, the high level of democracy in the EU which ensures that public opinion
is not ignored when decisions are taken on foreign and security policy issues is
grounded in citizenship. This, in turn, brings us to civil society. Arguably, the
broader notion of citizenship, especially as it relates to a civil society, has made
it more difficult for the EU to ‘invest’ in some of the countries important for
Latvia in terms of foreign policy, such as Georgia and Moldova. The development of civil society will increasingly influence Latvia’s own foreign and security policy; from a future perspective, an important issue when defining foreign
policy priorities is whether there is a balance between the interests and values
of the political elite and those of the society. Development co-operation is of
key importance in EU policies in various parts of the world. This means that
the people of Latvia must be prepared to invest the taxpayer’s money in Africa
and Asia.
The rule of law is one of the fundamental values of the European Union
and as such it fits into the values central to the development of its foreign and
security policy. Member states have been more active in thinking about the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

232

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 232

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

rule of law when determining common positions vis-à-vis countries, such as
Turkey, Iran, Belarus, whose place and role have been debated actively in Europe
and elsewhere. The rule of law, however, tends to be forgotten in situations where
interests impinge upon values. It would be welcome if the Union applied the
notion of the rule of law in its relations with countries, such as Russia, not only in
crisis situations (such as the interruption in energy deliveries, which stemmed
from a conflict between Russia and Belarus at the beginning of 2007), but more
frequently. Political pluralism and respect for differences are values not just in
the context of the diverse policies of countries which are outside of the EU, but
also, with regard to the specific political interests of EU Member States. This would
seem to suggest that populist calls for a single foreign and security policy will
yield no result, especially since the existence and recognition of pluralism are
absolute cornerstones of the Union itself. The rule of law, however, will continue
to be relevant and important in enhancing the role of international law in the
future. Let us recall that in the last decade the number of conflicts has increased
in the world. Yet, various countries acting together have not been able to agree
on effective means to end these conflicts. This situation has led to a kind of
clustering into two rather fluid groups: in the one there are the countries hoping
for an increased role of international law, while in the other there are the countries
preferring the balanced application of various means at their disposal. Most
EU Member States are in the first group.
Another value which will become more and more important for all Member
States has to do with the harmonisation of that which is national, regional and
global. There are clear divisions among those EU Member States which position
themselves not only against the regional but also global surroundings and
those which view the global context as a warning that calls for the creation of
a protectionist policy. This contradiction in values will affect the CFSP in the
future: the more the Union seeks to act as a global player, the greater will be
the disharmony, deriving from the divergent attitudes toward the effects of
globalisation, among the member states.
Prosperity is another important value. It is also one of the cornerstones of
the European Union. The Member States have achieved the highest level of
prosperity in the world and for several decades they have worked individually
and together to expand the area of welfare and stability. Those regions and
countries which the EU prioritises are the recipients of the ‘fruits’ of EU prosperity. Prosperity will remain a value also in the future, especially since sharing

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 233

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

233

and exporting prosperity will bring Member States together and help establish
a common platform for foreign and security policy.
Historicism also has an important place in the CFSP. This is a value which
reveals vividly the attitudinal differences of Member States toward the Union’s
international environment. It is a factor now and it will continue to be a factor
in the future. We can delineate several groups of states which have been influenced by their historicism. First, there are those EU Member States (the UK,
France, Belgium, Spain et al.) which used to be colonial powers; this fact tends
to explain why the EU, in its foreign policy, tends to pay more attention to the
former colonies of these members. In general, this interest beyond the Union’s
borders enhances the EU global role. Second, there are the countries (such as
Malta, Cyprus, Ireland and Sweden) which were neutral during the Cold War;
they have tended to maintain a low profile in foreign affairs or operate in regions considered as their customary turf. Then there are the post-Communist
countries which have brought a new component of historicism into the EU:
increased attention toward Russia and the territory of the former USSR. The
diverse historical experiences of EU Member States tend to expand the horizons of the CFSP. In this way historicism can be seen as furthering the EU goal
of becoming a global player. At the same time, historicism has fostered discord
among Member States over the priorities and content of the common policy.
The EU relationship with Russia is a vivid example of this. The post-Communist countries want the relationship to be based on a balanced set of interests
and values, because only a democratic country with a certain level of prosperity
will shape relations with partners on the basis of the rule of law, equality and
mutual respect. The countries in the first group, however, are interested in
maintaining their global role through bilateral relations; they, therefore, emphasise interests over values in their relations with Russia. The diminished
role of values has led to a situation where the heretofore multi-faceted relations
between the Union and Russia are being reduced to a single component: energy
(more specifically, the Union’s ‘dependence’ on its relations with Russia for
the timely delivery of energy resources). The deterioration of relations to such
a primitive level will lead to a decline in the EU international standing and
role in the future.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

234

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 234

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

3. Priorities in the foreign and security policies
of Member States – commonalities and differences
An assessment of the future development of the Union’s CFSP requires not
only a review of the values, but also an evaluation of the foreign and security
policy priorities of EU Member States. This makes it possible to analyse the
commonalities and differences in this regard among the Member States and
determine the proportion of the common features to the differences. The scope
of this paper allows us to focus only on the following major indicators of the
CFSP: approaches of Member States to EU integration (intergovernmental or
supranational), attitudes toward global processes, regional interests, and the
role of values.
The CFSP in the eyes of the Big Three
Germany favours the shaping of a supranational common EU policy and
regards the CFSP in this light. What is more, Germany supports a federal
model for the Union, and this idea of the EU future institutional architecture
stems from the national institutional structure of Germany itself.8 The CFSP is
viewed as one of the main elements leading toward ‘deeper’ EU integration,
which, in turn, would develop Europe into an independent player in the international arena, one that can act as necessary and use the appropriate military
capacities and civilian capabilities. The development of civilian capabilities in
the context of the European Security and Defence Policy9 is seen as a priority,
while military capacities are seen as a last-resort instrument for dealing with
crises.10 Germany argues that greater EU involvement and investments in international peacekeeping processes would ensure a more equitable sharing of
costs and obligations between the United States and the EU; furthermore, by
assuming greater responsibility, the EU would enhance its role in international
policy-making.11 In the White Book on Germany’s defence policy drafted in 2006,
the government defines the country’s national and international interests. It is
important to note that this publication particularly stresses Germany’s role as
an active EU member in the international processes. The White Book also
sends a message to Member States and the international community regarding
the political changes that have occurred in Germany since its new chancellor
assumed office. When it comes to values which need to be transmitted beyond
a country’s borders, the document speaks to human rights and an international

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 235

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

235

order which is based on international law. It advocates a free and open global
market, one that would help reduce the differences between the world’s poor
and wealthy regions.12
According to the White Book, co-operation in the area of development is
another important factor in the development of Europe’s security policy.
Europe is a leading provider of aid: currently, about 60% of international aid
distributed in the world comes from the Union.13
Germany considers that the EU should focus its attentions on countries in
Eastern Europe, the southern Caucasus, Central Asia and the Mediterranean
region within the context of its Neighbourhood Policy. Of major importance
for Germany is ‘sustainable and flexible co-operation with Russia in the area
of security.’14 Germany addresses globalisation in connections with the strengthening of national and EU links of an economic and political nature with the
Asian-Pacific Ocean region, Australia, Japan, China and India.15 Already in the
1960s Germany expressed its views vis-à-vis global processes. At that time
France and several other countries sought to direct the Union’s development
co-operation toward the former colonies in Africa. Germany and the Netherlands objected to these efforts, emphasising instead that aid should be distributed to the poorest countries first and in different parts of the world.16
The approach of the United Kingdom (UK) to EU integration emphasises
the importance of co-operation among individual countries. This policy stands
in stark contrast to Germany’s supranational views.17 Great Britain’s reluctance
to transfer some of its sovereignty to a supranational structure is best explained through its historical experience, especially as an empire. Concerning
the CFSP, the UK emphasises the primacy of international law over the laws
of the European Communities,18 and the United Nations as the main security
forum in the world.19 At the same time, the UK sees NATO as its main security
guarantor; in this context, historical links with the United States are an important factor in its attitude toward the ESDP. Britain supports development of the
ESDP in the context of its support for NATO and, in this regard, emphasises
the Berlin+ agreement.20 The Union is, therefore, accorded a secondary role in
that it would act in the areas where NATO does not act.21 Overall development
of the ESDP, the UK feels, would ensure stronger Transatlantic links.22 By
emphasising the Berlin+ agreement, Britain stresses the primacy of the EU’s
civilian capabilities; at the same time, it does not reject further development of
the Union’s military capacities.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

236

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 236

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

On the one hand, the UK says that there are no geographic borders for the
CFSP (i.e., it sees this as a global EU policy),23 and it directs its foreign policy
toward Africa, Latin America, the Middle East, the western Balkans, and Southwestern Europe,24 as well as toward the development of strategic relations
with Russia.25 On the other hand, the UK has encouraged increased EU attention
toward the former British colonies in Africa.26 The situation in the western
Balkans is viewed separately in that the UK emphasises humanitarian and
technical assistance, as well as macroeconomic support to promote social security (welfare).27 Britain also tries to direct attention to immigration problems
in the EU and utilise the development co-operation programmes. In 2002, Great
Britain and Spain proposed that EU development assistance be contingent on
the effort of recipient countries to reduce migration to the EU and to repatriate
illegal immigrants.28 Britain’s concern for development co-operation was evident
also in 1990, when its Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, argued that the Union
support those countries which advocate the rule of law, political pluralism
and market principles.29
France can be described as favouring something between the supranational
approach of Germany and the interstate approach of Great Britain. France believes in a strong Europe, but it argues that this goal must not reduce the
power of national governments.30 France’s attempt to straddle two different
approaches should be viewed with reservation, because the call for a more
powerful and unified CFSP is based not on the common interests of the EU,
but rather on France’s status as a regional power. Experts have noticed this
and said that the main goal of French foreign policy after the Second World
War has been to renew and strengthen France’s status as a power, including as
a military power.31 It seems, therefore, that the country’s declared aim in postwar Europe of renewing a stable and democratic Europe in the security and
economic sphere32 has been nothing more than political rhetoric. France’s
main goal in the EU context is to defend its national interests, because France
wants to see a powerful Europe, but it sees it mainly as a resource to develop
its own national ambitions.33 In other words, France considers the goals of the
EU’s CFSP to be closely linked to its own national interests, and the EU is
emphasised as the ‘main’ actor on the international stage – an actor with a
strategic vision, its own diplomacy and its own instruments to manage civilian
or military crises. The words ‘its own’, however, should be replaced in this
case with the word ‘French.’34

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 237

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

237

France tries to differentiate between ‘European issues’ (the Balkans) and
‘non-European issues’ (for example, the September 11 attacks in the United
States, the Iraq conflict, the spread of nuclear weapons).35 Such differentiation
provides and explanation for France’s various views against involvement in
the war in Iraq. Furthermore, it implies that Europe’s interests are distinctly
regional. This, in turn, suggests that France’s approach toward Europe’s international role may be anti-global.
According to France’s military programme for the period between 2003 and
2008, the principal goal of the its defence and security policy is to protect the
people of France and their interests at home and abroad. The programme calls
for increasing the autonomous decision-making capacity and then, if necessary,
moving forward individually. To a certain extent, this refers to the possibility
of individual activities in relation to France’s defence agreements in Africa and
the Middle East (historicism). The programme emphasises France’s potential
to become ‘lead nation’ in Europe – ‘something which may be necessary in a
coalition situation in terms of relying particularly on the ‘lead country’, which
can bring other participants together on the basis of its own capacities.’36
The UN is considered as important, largely because France is a member of
the Security Council. European – Transatlantic co-operation is emphasised as a
key element of security.37 It is significant that France, unlike the other EU Member
States which also belong to NATO, assigns only a secondary role to the alliance despite being its member.
France’s views on further enlarging the European Union tend to be equivocal.
It does not take a firm stand against enlargement; yet it argues that enlargement cannot be seen as a positive factor in terms of the CFSP and ESDP. The
negative aspects of the process, as far as Paris is concerned, include the fact
that new member states are not always able to adapt their institutional mechanisms to the new situation, nor can they make a substantial contribution to
the CSFP because they are small and less developed economically.38
The Mediterranean countries
Greece has always been a ‘complicated’ partner in the shaping of EU
foreign policy, because it has often distanced itself from the Union’s common
policies. For Greece, history continues to be major factor in the shaping of a
common defence dimension with Cyprus.39 Nationalism, harking back to

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

238

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 238

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

Hellenic culture, has been a powerful argument in the development of Greek
positions on international issues; in historical terms, it has been important in
shaping the policy vis-à-vis the United States and in helping to determine the
EU policy toward Islamic countries. Historically Greece has preserved good
relations with Syria, but its national interests are linked more with Cyprus,
Turkey and the Balkans. Though Greece has traditionally distanced itself from
the processes of the EU common foreign policy, it has insisted that its own
interests be considered at the EU level.40 At the same time the government in
Athens has been passive toward the issues it considers as unrelated to Greece.
This suggests that Greece sees the EU as an instrument for pursuing its own
interests. Greece stresses that ESDP programmes have created conditions for
co-operation in the area of defence, ones that will, in the long term, reduce
defence spending and ensure proper conditions for economic and technological
development.
The Greek position vis-à-vis the CFSP is focused on the notions which speak
to mostly non-military crisis management, the leading role of the UN Security
Council in ensuring global security and peace through international law enforcement institutions, co-operation, economic development, democracy, human
rights (other countries emphasise human rights, too, but Greece does so with
particular vigour), as well as individual rights.
Greece wants the EU to be a strong actor in global policy, one that is able to
mobilise its economic, trade, diplomatic and, if necessary, military capabilities.
Greece supports deeper integration in the context of the ESDP, and members
of the country’s political elite are unified in their vision of Europe as a community (the supranational approach). This, however, is not an unequivocal position
in the context of EU integration, however, because there are certain signs which
suggest that Greece favours both the supranational and the interstate approaches.
While stressing the need to expand qualified majority voting in all areas, Greece
also feels that military issues must be agreed upon on unanimously.41
The foreign policy of Italy underscores two components which are important in the EU’s CFSP. First of all, Italy specifies the geographic area (Africa,
Asia, Antarctica, America, Europe, the Mediterranean and the Middle East) of
its national interests, which indicates a global view of international processes,
even if Italy looks more toward Africa, the Balkans and the Mediterranean
region. Second, Italy’s stated political priorities are: Euro-Atlantic relations,
co-operation in the Mediterranean region, stability in the Balkans and the fight

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 239

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

239

against terrorism. The government in Rome also devotes much attention to
human rights in the world and to the fight against racism and discrimination.42
The United States are very important in Italian foreign policy, and close cooperation with the USA is often seen as more important than co-operation
with the larger countries of the EU.43 Italy points to the need for ‘fundamental
strategic co-operation’ between the United States and the EU, and it positions
itself more as a country which is focused on NATO.
One of the basic priorities for Italy is the development of co-operation with
countries on the southern shore of the Mediterranean Sea. Italy wants to have
a long-term European and Mediterranean Free Trade Area by 2010. Italy is one
of the countries arguing for balance between Europe’s Eastern and Southern
policy dimensions.44 The Eastern Dimension mostly relates to co-operation
with Russia. In situations where one EU Member State tries to emphasise its
preferred region, such a balanced position from Italy could help to reconcile
divergent views. Italy supports the Union’s closer integration in the realms of
defence and security; this has been manifested in Rome’s efforts to expand the
use of qualified majority voting in the context of the CFSP45. Here again we see
a supranational approach.
Spain seeks closer co-operation with France, Germany and the United States,
and it views the EU as a guarantor of Spain’s increased role in the international arena. Its foreign policy interests lie mainly in Latin America and the
Mediterranean region. Spain is involved in developing relations between the
EU and Cuba (historicism). In the context of the CFSP, Spain has not singled out
any ‘particular’ values, although in general it endorses multilateralism, human
rights and the rule of law.46 Madrid sees the development of EU military and
civilian capabilities as equally important for the purpose of crisis-prevention
and other operations. Regarding the European Neighbourhood Policy, Spain
supports those projects which relate to countries that are in its region.47 Spain
favours closer CFSP integration, but mostly on the basis of an interstate approach.48
Portugal’s priorities lie in the regions of Sub-Saharan Africa, the Mediterranean,49 and Latin America.50 Portugal has tried to direct the CFSP toward its
former colonies in Africa51 and, in particular, on East Timor.52 Unlike Spain,
Portugal wishes to move closer to the United Kingdom as a strategic partner;
that would also foster the development of closer co-operation with the United
States.53 NATO is seen as the ‘structural axis of Portugal’s security and defence
system’ and a fundamental guarantor of military security, while the ESDP is

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

240

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 240

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

viewed as an instrument for crisis management.54 When it comes to the EU’s
CFSP, Portugal supports an interstate approach which allows each Member
State to think about areas of further integration and development.55
The Benelux countries
In the context of the CFSP, Belgium’s focus is on Central Africa (Congo,
Rwanda, Burundi), Russia (mostly strategic co-operation in the area of energy
supplies), the Middle East, the Mediterranean region as a network for advantageous mutual co-operation, and the Balkans as a region where there are
opportunities for development in regional co-operation and economic affairs
so as to ‘stabilise the European continent.’56
Belgium supports the development by the EU of the non-military techniques
and mechanisms at its disposal. The non-military component in particular
makes the EU different from NATO, and that means that the EU is better at
various aspects of crisis management such as observation, stabilisation and
restoration. The Transatlantic dialogue is important to guarantee international
security.57 As instruments in the civilian dimension of the ESDP, Belgium emphasises diplomacy, immigration policy, the fight against organised crime, and
trade and development policies. Belgium has been very actively interested in
the development of civilian resources (training police officials, civil defence
specialists and judges) so that they can be mobilised for crisis management.
Even before the tsunami crisis, Belgium had proposed the establishment of an
EU first aid and support team (EU-FAST). The proposal, however, was rejected;
Since then, Belgium has devoted much attention to strengthening Europe’s
capacity for providing assistance in emergencies and disasters.58
Belgium firmly believes in a supranational Europe. As Prime Minister Guy
Verhofstadt has put it, ‘the foundation for Europe’s future is the establishment
of a federal Europe.’59
When it comes to CFSP and ESDP, the Netherlands prioritises conflict prevention, crisis management and human rights issues.60 Concerning the ESDP,
functions , such as civilian crisis management, are seen as important. The
Hague argues that the Berlin+ agreement, which deals with the Union using
NATO military capacities in the future, could be supplemented with a similar
accord allowing NATO to use the EU’s civilian capabilities.61 Also important for
the Dutch foreign and security policy is co-operation with the United States.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 241

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

241

In addition to peace and welfare, the Netherlands emphasises such EU
values as freedom, rule of law and human rights, pluralism, tolerance, nondiscrimination and solidarity. These are fundamental to the notion European
citizenship now, and that will remain true in the future.62 Unlike Belgium, the
Netherlands supports an interstate approach to EU integration. It sees the EU
as a union of independent countries which have come together on the basis of
co-operation and legally binding rules.63
For Luxembourg , a small country, participation in international or regional
organisations is particularly important for the articulation of its interests. In
the EU, Luxembourg has always defended ever closer integration among
Member States in all areas, including the CFSP.64 Given the level of economic
development in Luxembourg and the strength of its financial sector, welfare
and competition may well be the country’s highest priorities in the EU and at
the national level.
Luxembourg’s closest partners are its neighbours (France, Germany, Belgium) and together they have assembled a joint battle group under the ESDP.65
Four Member States and neutrality
Austria’s priorities confirm its desire to strengthen the EU’s international
position by deepening co-operation in the context of the CFSP and the ESDP.
Regional priorities include intensification of neighbourly relations with the
western Balkan countries, Russia, as well as the countries of the Mediterranean,
the Near East and the Middle East.
Other priorities include stronger Transatlantic links on the basis of common
values, greater authority for the United Nations, defence of international law,
human rights and minority rights, and strengthening of the principles of multilateralism (the principle of political pluralism).66
In the context of the CFSP, Austria emphasises the need for the EU to operate internationally as a unified entity, particularly when expressing its position
on armed conflicts, human rights, and other issues which relate to the Union’s
basic principles and values.67 At the same time, however, Austria wishes to maintain an individual view on issues such as Turkey’s admission to the Union. In
geographic terms, Austria sees the CFSP as currently concentrating on the
western Balkans, Near East, Iraq, Iran, the southern Caucasus, Central Asia
and Africa.68

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

242

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 242

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

‘For Austria, the ESDP is the highest institutional priority in the development of its defence policies,’69 but its neutrality means that it must emphasise
the development of civilian capabilities within the policy. Austria supports a
balanced development of the ESDP’s civilian and military capacities in monitoring missions, civilian administration and support for the rule of law. Austrians participate in the following ESDP operations: EUFOR ALTHEA, EUPM,
EUJUST LEX, EU monitoring in Aceh, the police mission EUPOL COPPS, the
EUBAM border monitoring mission in Rafah, and the EUPAT in Macedonia.
In other words, Austria is contributing actively to global security.70 The security
of the EU is seen as the basic element in Austrian security (regionalism), even
though the Austrian doctrine on security and defence also recognises a total
defence concept in line with Austria’s ‘vital interests.’ Of particular importance to Vienna are Europe’s peripheral regions, ones in which political transformations are taking place. These changes affect stability and welfare in the
relevant regions. Austria is a country which has found that membership in the
EU and the undertaking of global obligations under the auspices of a regional
organisation has compelled some fundamental changes in its traditional foreign
policy, such as departure from the concept of neutrality.
Ireland’s policy of military neutrality also stresses the importance of the
development of civilian capabilities in the context of the EU’s CFSP.
Ireland’s emphasis in international policies is largely based on multilateralism, which affects its positive attitude toward the ongoing enlargement of the
Union and the missions in countries which need help with stabilisation, welfare and the rule of law (Congo, Darfur, Georgia). Ireland sees its EU membership as a way of enhancing its role at the international level. In the context
of the EU’s Neighbourhood Policy, Dublin pays particular attention to Ukraine,
Belarus, Uzbekistan and Moldova.71 In this sense, Ireland is one of the few old
Member States of the European Union which is interested in the same countries
as Latvia.
‘Malta is on the cultural border between Europe and northern Africa,’72 and
that determines its role in the CFSP. Malta’s official position is that the CFSP is
not incompatible with Maltese neutrality.73 The Mediterranean region is most
important for Valetta, with particular attention focused on Libya, Tunisia, Egypt
and the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Malta supports the EU Neighbourhood Policy, in other words, in shaping external relations, and it supports the
EU strategic partnerships in the Mediterranean region and the Middle East, as

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 243

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

243

well as relations between the EU and the Arab League.74 Malta is also interested
in the EU relations with Russia, the United States, China and India.75 Owing to
its advocacy of neutrality, Malta is not involved in the military segment of
ESDP operations, but it does take part in the establishment of the EU’s rapid
reaction forces insofar as humanitarian and rescue operations are concerned.76
Cyprus has never formulated clear priorities vis-à-vis the CFSP, though
Cypriot diplomats have expressed constructive support for the policy. Of particular importance is the geo-strategic position of Cyprus in the Mediterranean
Sea.77 Cyprus, like Malta, focuses on the European-Mediterranean dimension
of the EU Neighbourhood Policy,78 and on the crisis in the Middle East.79
Cyprus argues that the EU should be developed on the basis of community
principles, which uphold the equality of Member States and prohibit the emergence of a hierarchical structure which ignores the interests of small countries.
Cyprus is among those Member States which views with reservation the
expanded use of qualified majority voting in the context of the CFSP.80
The most significant problem in the context of EU enlargement is the
complicated historical relationship which Cyprus has had with Turkey. Ankara has never recognised the ‘Greek section’ of Cyprus, nor has it opened its
ports and airports to Cyprus. It is believed that Turkey’s accession to the EU
will be impossible until this matter is resolved.81
Because of its neutrality, Cyprus takes part in the European Police Forces
and other civilian programmes of the ESDP, and it is assisting in the formation
of an EU battle group with Greece, Romania and Bulgaria, but its participation
is limited to civilian personnel.82
The Nordic countries
Sweden also has a tradition of neutrality in its foreign relations. When it
comes to the CFSP, Sweden insists on an intergovernmental model of co-operation, which actually harks back to this tradition. Concerning universal values,
Sweden stresses human rights, arguing that these must be ‘the cornerstone for
Swedish foreign policy.’83 Sweden also emphasises welfare; for instance, the
Mediterranean partnership must be aimed at reducing the gap in welfare
among the countries of the region.84
An indication of Sweden’s global approach to international security, is its
insistence that humanitarian and peacekeeping missions should ‘make the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

244

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 244

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

world a safer place.’85 Sweden’s foreign policy is based on the position of
globalism, so its interests involve both Africa (particularly Darfur) and Latin
America.86 Within the EU, Stockholm shows particular interest in relations
with Russia, Ukraine’s wish for close relations with the Union, democratisation in Belarus, and the further development of the Northern Dimension.87
The Swedish foreign policy is rather remarkable: Sweden, while emphasising
its historical neutrality and the fact that it has not joined in alliances, will become involved internationally and participate in different missions if such involvement strengthens its position in the world. For instance, Sweden is the
leading investor in the countries around the Baltic Sea. When the EU Northern
Dimension was first instituted in 2000, Sweden had little interest in it, but as
the influence of the policy grew, Stockholm became more and more involved.
Sweden is also becoming more active in the EU Neighbourhood Policy. Thus,
Latvia, which is also active in the ENP, may encounter greater competition in
this area.
Neutrality and policies of non-alignment have influenced Sweden’s position
on European defence policies, but full participation in the CFSP and ESDP
keep it from advocating genuine neutrality. Sweden’s national defence is still
based on the principle of ‘total defence.’88 The basic influence of neutrality has
to do with an emphasis on the peacekeeping and humanitarian aspects of the
ESDP.89 Accordingly, Sweden’s key priority in the ESDP is the development of
crisis management capabilities.90
Finland, like Sweden, is a ‘neutral’ country which participates in the CFSP and
ESDP, and which emphasises crisis management as its priority in EU foreign
policy.91 Finland argues that among the most important issues are: greater Transatlantic ties, EU-Russia relations, EU Neighbourhood Policy and, especially,
the further development of the Northern Dimension.92 Finland’s geopolitical
interests also include Africa93 and the Balkans. In terms of values, Helsinki
wants Europe to enhance its competitiveness in global markets and to include
human rights policies in EU policy. These issues were cited as priorities for the
Finnish presidency of the EU.94
Finland has supported qualified majority voting with regard to the CFSP,
but it also argues that defence issues in the EU must be resolved on the basis of
unanimity.95 Member States, according to Helsinki, must always have a choice
as to whether they wish to take part in the EU common defence policy.96 Finland actively participates in the development of Northern Dimension policies,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 245

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

245

and during its two periods of EU presidency, it has presented itself as an expert
on Russia. Moscow accepts this role, too. Other EU Member States also find it
more acceptable to have Finland as an expert, as opposed to any attempt by the
Baltic States to present themselves in that role. The fear is that Baltic positions
would be dominated by historical issues, not pragmatically based arguments.
Denmark does not participate in the military part of the CFSP, but in the
ESDP it is involved in issues related to the first EU pillar, such as the fight
against terrorism.97 Copenhagen favours a positive model of intergovernmental
co-operation. The EU is important for Denmark in terms of enhancing security
through political and economic instruments, but the EU is relatively unimportant when it comes to defence.98 Denmark recognises that the development of
Europe’s military capacities is a natural manifestation of the EU’s more active
role in the world.99 NATO is seen as the cornerstone for Danish defence policy,
and observers have noted that the more ‘Atlantic’ is the EU foreign policy, the
more attractive it seems to Copenhagen.100
Denmark’s foreign policy, when addressing security, stresses the need to
ensure both the country’s security and welfare. They go back to the fundamental values upon which Denmark’s open society is based. The values include
individual and community freedom, democracy and security. European and
Transatlantic components are seen as prerequisites for the global dimension of
Danish foreign policy.101 Copenhagen is also interested in Africa and the Middle
East;102 these elements indicate the global aspects of the policy. Bilateral cooperation is focused mostly on the countries around the Baltic Sea region and
the western Balkans; in such cooperation, Denmark emphasises security and
stability, democracy and human rights, legislative reforms, the development of
the civil society, the environment and energy, as well as the development of
business the economies in the Baltic Sea region.103 It is significant that unlike
Sweden, Denmark has never promoted itself as a regional leader; moreover, it
has continued to focus on the Baltic Sea region also since the enlargement of
the EU and NATO. This could be advantageous for Latvia as it implements its
foreign and security policies.
Central European countries
For the Czech Republic, foreign policy priorities include the EU, NATO,
good relations with its neighbours, fight of terrorism, and the development of

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

246

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 246

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

human rights at the international level. Prague particularly stresses co-operation
with Austria and Germany (regionalism). Common battle groups are to be
established with those countries; the Czech Republic is also working with Austria
in the ALTHEA operation in the Balkans. Historicism is palpable owing to the
end of the Cold War and the changes it wrought leading to the ‘era of global
security and stability.’ Human rights in the Czech Republic is linked specifically to the abuses thereof during the Soviet era, and that is why human rights
remain one of Prague’s key priorities.104
The Security Strategy of the Czech Republic cites risks related to threats
against the population, the country’s independence, the territorial integrity of
the state, the democratic system, the rule of law, internal order and property
principles.105
When it comes to strategic interests, Prague focuses on economic security
via global economic stability, strategic raw materials, products and services,
diversification of capital and protection of the strategic infrastructure; greater
competitiveness for the domestic defence industry; and the spread of the principles of freedom, democracy and the rule of law.106
As is the case for other ‘new’ Member States, the main pillar for the Czech
collective defence is NATO.107 The EU’s CFSP, in turn, must work closely together
with the North Atlantic alliance.108 In the context of the CFSP, Prague supports
the developing the EU role as a global actor, but it also argues that when it
comes to security issues, the EU must concentrate primarily on Europe and its
neighbouring territories. Accordingly, the Czech Republic supports the development of the EU’s crisis prevention and post-conflict stabilisation capacities
as being of fundamental importance.109
The Czech Republic has identified three regions as its priorities in the EU’s
CFSP, and this is the result of the country’s traditional links and existing interests. The regions include Russia and other countries of the former USSR (Belarus,
Ukraine, Moldova), the Western Balkans and the Middle East. According to
Prague, Russia’s size, resources and powerful ambitions have led the EU to
consider it both a partner and ‘riddle’ which the Czech Republic can help to
solve. In the Balkans, the Czechs have historical ties from the times of the AustroHungarian monarchy and even earlier. The Czech Republic is actively involved
in restoring order and the rule of law in this region.
The Czech political elite have not agreed on a unified approach toward EU
integration. An intergovernmental approach is usually preferred, but Prague

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 247

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

247

also thinks that supranational instruments are necessary to ensure more effective decisions in the CFSP.110
The National Security Strategy of Poland makes reference to human rights,
democracy and the rule of law as cornerstones of international security; it also
addresses economic growth and involvement in the global dialogue of culture
under the auspices of the United Nations (tolerance).111
Poland positions itself as a country which is distinctly oriented toward
NATO and does not support the establishment of an autonomous EU military
command structure that is separate from the alliance.112 Before accession to the
EU, other new Member States also viewed the Common European Security
Policy with some caution, emphasising in most cases that the establishment of
a European security space would mean an overlap with NATO. If the Czech
Republic is typified by the attitude that the Berlin+ agreement is enough and
that no competing alliance is needed, then Poland is a special case in this regard. Poland insists on strong transatlantic links, but it also argues that Europe
needs its own security capabilities.113 Poland’s proposed solution is the establishment of an EU army which is directly linked to NATO.114
Poland places great importance on the defence of its national interests
under the auspices of the CFSP,115 and on establishing its own image as a
responsible country at the international level.116 Foreign policy interests relate
mostly to Russia (energy supplies), Ukraine (the free market economy), and
Belarus (minority rights and the Polish diaspora in Belarus). Warsaw works
with Georgia, Moldova and Armenia, stressing historicism in terms of their
common experience with the USSR.117 Another indicator of historicism is that
Poland has been involved in peacekeeping operations since 1953. Poland was
the only member state of the Warsaw Pact which could send its forces on international missions.118 This experience is relevant to the country’s desire in
current times to be involved in international processes. Poland is actively involved in the Middle East peace processes, and that is facilitated by good relations with Israel. Another important foreign policy priority in the context of
the CFSP is its relations with the Mediterranean countries.119 Among the new
EU Member States, Poland stands out on account of its strong interest in the
global processes. This allows Poland to play a role among the larger countries
of the EU.
For Slovakia, NATO is the centrepiece of security, so the country sees the
ESDP as part of the NATO collective defence system.120 Before joining the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

248

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 248

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

Union , Slovakia considered the ESDP as an ‘unnecessary part of EU integration,’121 and it had some reservations about the EU defence policy in general.
At the same time, during the Slovak negotiations on EU membership, one of the
easiest discussions was about the ESDP, and that section of the negotiations was
completed rather quickly.122 Slovakia supports an intergovernmental approach
to the CFSP, but concerning the ESDP, Slovakia focuses more on co-operation
with NATO.123
Despite its reserved attitude, Slovakia participates in the EU external security
processes. Since 2003, it has taken part in the EU operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and a monitoring mission in Macedonia.124 Currently, it is working on a
joint EU battle group together with Poland, Germany, Latvia and Lithuania.
Slovakia has also demonstrated an increasing interest in the development
of democratisation and a market economy in Ukraine.125 Its geographic location
would suggest also a natural interest in the Balkans.126
The National Security Strategy of Hungary emphasises the importance of EuroAtlantic integration processes,127 along with universal values such as democracy,
the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms in international politics.
Among the national security interests, the document lists support for EU
integration at the vertical and horizontal level, equality and solidarity among
EU Member States, and improvement of the organisation’s methods.128 Like
Slovakia, Hungary emphasises the need to ensure that the ESDP is compatible
with NATO.129 When it comes to taking decisions about the CFSP, Hungary
supports both the need for unanimous decisions and for qualified majority
voting.130
Hungary pays particular attention to relations with Russia, Ukraine, the
Caucasus and the Middle East. Budapest thinks that the CFSP offers greater
opportunities for Hungary to defend its interests in the EU, while membership
in the EU helps it to have greater influence in global processes.131
For Slovenia, the basic security guarantor is NATO. Regarding the ESDP,
Slovenia emphasises crisis management.132 This position reflects the country’s
thinking that conflicts should be resolved peacefully, without the use of force.133
The basic values in its foreign policy are the security and welfare of the country’s
residents. This is to be achieved by ‘strengthening Slovenia’s national identity
and being open to the world.’
When it comes to the CFSP, Ljubljana recalls that it co-operated with the
authors of that policy even before it signed an accession treaty in 2003, doing

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 249

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

249

so through the Accession Countries Network.134 It also argues on behalf of development co-operation via the EU Neighbourhood Policy, focusing in particular
on Russia and the countries of the Mediterranean region (the EuropeanMediterranean Partnership).135 The Balkans are Slovenia’s most important
foreign policy priority, and it takes part in EU operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Macedonia.
Slovenia supports the expansion of qualified majority voting in the CFSP. It
says that the exclusion of a national veto is based on the need to find more
effective solutions to refugees and asylum seekers from beyond the EU’s borders (supranationalism).136
The Baltic States
The focus of Estonia’s security policy is on ensuring the country’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, constitutional order and public safety. Among the
principles of the Security policy, the document includes participation in crisis
management and peacekeeping operations run by various organisations (NATO,
the UN, the OSCE, the EU). NATO is seen as the basic security guarantor. The
development of the ESDP is secondary for Estonia.137 Estonia has been quite
passive in terms of CFSP activities, although Tallinn says that it does see a
chance to make use of the policy in the future.138 Estonia’s priorities in the
ESDP include a greater role for the EU in the world, security and stability in
neighbouring countries, support for economic growth and democracy on the
basis of market economies, and strengthening of transatlantic links. Estonia
monitors the development of the EU Neighbourhood Policy, focusing in particular on Ukraine (where Estonia takes part in an EU border assistance mission),
Moldova and Georgia, as well as Azerbaijan and Armenia, where Estonia participates in development co-operation and technical assistance projects. Recently
Estonia began work on a development assistance project in Egypt.139 Estonia
has said that the CFSP does not need to be focused on the EU itself, because
internal relations are resolved through the foreign policies of its member states.140
Lithuania considers the EU’s CFSP a part of its security policy, but NATO
remains the cornerstone of its security. Lithuania is, nonetheless, an active
participant in the CFSP. It was an initiator of the EU civilian mission on the
rule of law in Georgia; there the aim was to lay a solid foundation for the rule
of law by reforming the country’s system of criminal law. Co-operation with

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

250

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 250

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

Georgia recalls historical links which are the result of common experience
under the Soviet regime. In the context of the European security strategy,
Lithuania calls for a multilateral approach and open consultations with the
transatlantic partners before important decisions are taken.141
According to Lithuania’s National Security Strategy, the country’s most
important interests are sovereignty, territorial integrity, a democratic constitutional order, a civil society, protection of human rights and freedoms, as well
as welfare. In the context of the EU, the strategy notes equality, co-operation,
solidarity and the rule of law. Among the priorities in international co-operation
and good-neighbour policies, there is co-operation within the Baltic Sea region,
a strategic partnership with the United States and Poland, relations with Russia
(particularly with regard to the Kaliningrad enclave), relations with Belarus,
and interregional co-operation (the Balkans, the southern Caucasus, Central
Asia). Poland is Lithuania’s most important partner in the area of security, but
foreign policy interests also cover democratisation in Belarus and the establishment of strong ties with the USA.142
Latvia’s attitude vis-à-vis the EU’s CFSP is based on a broader international
context. Latvia has formulated the desire to defend its national interests in the
future, and that represents a fairly clear intergovernmental position. At the
same time, Latvia also seeks closer co-operation within the Union: ‘Latvia’s
strategic goal within the EU is to continue strengthening EU unity in internal
processes and in foreign policy, to promote the EU’s global competitiveness,
and to increase the level of economic development and public welfare in Latvia
as quickly as possible.’143 Although this is a clumsy statement, it basically does
not differ from those presented by most other Member States which choose to
balance out the intergovernmental and the supranational approach to further
European integration. Both the aforementioned Latvian foreign policy document
and Latvia’s national security concept accent the global processes and multilateralism, as shown by Latvia’s assertion that it respects the principles of the
UN and the OSCE.144 Regarding the CFSP and ESDP, Latvia prefers close cooperation with the EU and NATO and advocates a balanced and well justified
use of both military and civilian resources: ‘Latvia considers co-operation and
consultations between the EU and NATO to be fundamentally important. These
should continue to develop on the basis of common interests related to issues
which have to do with security, defence and crisis management, creating, with
the help of military and civilian methods, effective solutions to crises.’145

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 251

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

251

When it comes to the regional components of the CFSP, absolute priorities
for Latvia are its neighbouring regions with which Latvia has also shared
some of its history. ‘It is in Latvia’s interests that in the EU’s neighbouring
countries and proximate regions, long-term stability emerges, democracy is
strengthened, there is further economic and social development, and the policies
of the said countries are oriented toward co-operation with European institutions. Latvia shall devote particular attention to Eastern European countries,
with which it will continue to engage in intensive political dialogue and cooperation so as to transfer to them the reform experience which has been accumulated over the last several years.’146
The new Member States
Bulgaria and Romania are busy with fully establishing themselves as members of the Union, and they have had little to say about priorities in the further
development of the CFSP. It can be expected that both countries will join
Hungary and Slovenia to encourage greater focus on the western Balkans.147
Bulgaria has not stated specific priorities in the context of the CFSP, except for
an increased interest in the western Balkans and the area of the Black Sea. Of
high priority in Bulgarian foreign policy is the development of good relations
with its neighbours, particularly with Greece and Turkey. Also important is a
Balkan initiative on regional security and co-operation.148 Bulgaria is talking
about participation in a battle group project that is being led by Greece.149 Sofia
considers the best model of EU integration to be the interstate approach.150
Romania stresses the principles of freedom, security and justice,151 as well
as the need to strike a balance between the United States and Russia in global
policy.152 Moldova is of particular interest to Bucharest.153
The wider picture: an interim assessment
Having briefly described priorities and approaches toward foreign security
of each EU Member State, and the basic values upon which these policies have
been based, a correlation of the findings (see Table 1) will allow us to see the
results in a broader perspective, draw some general conclusions and delineate
several options for the future.
We can draw several fundamental conclusions as to future developments
after we correlate the priorities and approaches toward foreign and security

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

252

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 252

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

policy in the various EU Member States and on the basic values upon which
these policies are based (Table 1).
Table 1

Priorities of the EU Member States in the EU CFSP
Political Demo- Approach/
Interests
pluralism cracy

CFSP

Globalisation

Austria

Y

Y

B, R, M, ME, A

Belgium

Y

Y /N

A, B, M, ME

SN

Bulgaria

Y

B, MJ

IG

Czech Rep.

Y

Country

Denmark

Regionalisation

Y

Y

Historicism

IG/SN

Y

R, CIS, B, ME

Y

Y

IG/SN

Y

BSR

Y

Y

IG

Y /A

Y /Germany

Finland

Y

Y

R, BSR

Y

IG

France

Y

Y

ME, A

Y

IG/SN

Y/Germany/A

Germany

Y

Y

R,B, ME

Y

SN

Y

Greece

Y

B, M

Y

Hungary

Y

Estonia

Y

Ireland

Y/NT

Italy

Y

Cyprus

Y/NT

UK

Y

Lithuania

Y

Y

R, CIS, ME

SN
IG

BSR, CIS

Y

Y

IG/SN

Y

B

Y

Y

IG/SN

Y

A, M, ME, B

SN

Y

M, B

IG

Y
Y

Y

ME, A, B

Y

Y

IG

Y

R, CIS, BSR, B

Y

Y

IG

Latvia

Y

R, CIS, BSR, B

Y

IG/SN

Luxembourg

Y

B

Y

IG/SN

Malta

Y/NT

M, ME, A, R

Netherlands

Y

Poland

Y

R, CIS, ME

IG

Portugal

Y

A, M

IG

Romania

Y

MJ, B, ME

IG

Slovakia

Y

B

IG

Slovenia

Y

B, M

IG/SN

Spain

Y

Sweden

Y/NT

Y

B

IG
Y

IG

A, M, LA
Y

BSR, R, CIS, A,
ME

Y

SN
Y

Y/LA
IG

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 253

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

253

Explanation of abbreviations
Y – Yes
N – No
IG – Intergovernmentalism
SN – Supranationalism
H – Historicism
A – Africa
NT – Neutrality
CIS – Confederacy of Independent States

B
– Balkans
BLSR – Black Sea Region
BSR – Baltic Sea Region
R
– Russia
ME – Middle East
M
– Mediterranean region
LA – Latin America

From the information in Table 1 we see that all EU Member States have
similar scales of values which are applied in the formulation and establishment
of the CFSP. The spectrum is a fairly wide and ranges from assessing the global
processes, facilitating of democracy and welfare, political pluralism, to the
presence of historicism in issues of foreign and security policy. Analysts may be
sceptical about the importance of values in the development of the CFSP, but
the fact is that values serve as the foundation for a common platform. All
Member States have agreed to co-operate within the CFSP, and that means that
no individual country will refuse to take part in international processes.
The greatest differences are seen in the area of regional interests. This does
not, however, suggest that the EU is about to split up. If the involvement of EU
Member States in the nearby and more distant regions becomes a ‘division of
labour’ and a process where the best practices and expert information are
transferred via co-ordinated activities, then there will be no unnecessary competition over resources and influence. There are also differences in the approaches upon which the EU Member States base themselves. At the level of
values, Member States position themselves as supporters of the supranational
approach; however, with just a few exceptions (Germany, Greece, Italy, Belgium,
Luxembourg), they also seek an interstate approach to the CFSP. This is true
even though these positions can differ in relation to other policies. Still, it is
important to note the trend of attaching greater weight to the elements of a
supranational approach, and this is something which is the result of external
pressures (Russia, Iran).

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

254

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 254

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

4. The relationship between values and interests
in the EU Neighbourhood Policy
In discussions about the European Union and the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), invariably there are references to Europe’s common values.
Moreover, the ENP documents emphasise the importance of these values. This,
in turn, raises a number of questions, including the following: has the Union
not been too idealistically naive in conceiving a Neighbourhood Policy so as to
foster an acceptance of its values in the regions surrounding it? Are these
values only asserted ‘on paper’ – in other words, do they provide a convenient
smokescreen for the Union’s ambitions of enhancing its political and economic
influence in the world? A closer look at the ENP shows that these very different
impressions are not unfounded, though, at the same time, they are also misleading. We also see that the ENP is still developing, and all relevant concepts
have not yet been harmonised. This makes it difficult to answer two fundamental questions: how and to what extent do the EU common values comprise
the ENP, and how effectively does the ENP introduce and implement its policies
in the neighbouring countries? Since all these questions are valid now and will
remain relevant in the coming years, they deserve to be addressed in detail. Let
us, therefore, begin by taking a brief look at how the ENP developed. Then let us
compare the European values which are mentioned in the latest ENP documents
and the values which have been analysed by Ivars Ijabs in his study. To conclude this segment of the compilation, let us evaluate the Union’s success in
imparting its values among the neighbouring countries.
A brief look at the ENP and its development
The European Neighbourhood Policy came into being on May 12, 2004, when
the European Commission approved its ‘European Neighbourhood Policy
Strategy Paper.’154 The EU commissioner for external relations is responsible
for the policy, and it is financed from several sources. As of 2007, money for
ENP-related projects and activities comes from the European Neighbourhood
and Partnership Instrument (ENPI). Countries which work with the EU in the
context of the ENP can receive funds and loans from the ENPI.155
The EU tends to consider the notion of neighbours broadly and inclusively.
The Internet homepage of the ENP lists 16 countries as partners. These are

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 255

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

255

countries in Europe, the Middle East, the southern Caucasus, and northern
Africa. Levels of co-operation with the Union are as diverse as are these countries
and their geographic location.156 Two to three documents define the nature and
scope of co-operation with each country, except for Belarus, Syria, Algeria and
Libya, which have no such documents.
Without focusing on the history of the EU in depth, let us note that since the fall
of the Iron Curtain in Europe in the late 20th century, the EU’s interest in the
surrounding area has expanded enormously and has manifested itself in two ways:
■ the European Union tries to integrate its neighbouring countries into the
EU processes and, eventually, into the EU itself;
■ if it turns out that this manner of integration is not effective or not appropriate, the EU aims to ensure stable relations with the neighbouring
countries in the region and stability at the Union’s borders.
The European Neighbourhood Policy is a creation of the 21st century.157 It
evolved as a policy and continues to develop to this day. The emergence of the
ENP was facilitated and influenced by the grand enlargement of the EU on
May 1, 2004, when 10 new Member States joined the community. As a result,
the external borders of the EU changed radically. The Union grew not only in
terms of territory but also in terms of self-confidence. This led to an increased
desire to take part in the shaping and determination of global processes. The
new situation also called for a new policy, one that would be both friendly and
differentiating toward its new surroundings. The EU wished to have at its
borders a ring of friendly states. At the same time, the EU wanted to distinguish
between the Union and the rest of the continent without creating new borders
or divisions in Europe.
Broadly speaking, the goals of the ENP are to promote security, stability
and prosperity in the entire region which surrounds the enlarged EU. Early
drafts of the policy stressed in particular the idea that this is an unselfish policy,
one that is benevolent and inclusive, one that brings everyone together under
the aegis of shared European values. Over time, the initial exuberance has subsided, even if it has not disappeared altogether.158 This exuberance eclipsed
somewhat key aspects of the ENP that were always there:
■ the policy is based on common interests and benefits;
■ the aim of the policy is to promote security in the Union and in its environs
(the ENP, let us remember, was harmonised with the European Security
Strategy of 2003);

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

256

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 256

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

countries affiliated with the ENP have the opportunity to become more
closely integrated into the European Union. The end result of such integration, however, remains unclear. On the one hand, the ENP is not envisioned as a policy leading toward EU membership of the participating
countries. On the other hand, the ENP does not suggest or specify any
other final result.
The goals of the European Neighbourhood Policy are to promote the development of a stable democracy, the rule of law and prosperity in the entire
region surrounding the enlarged EU. The strategy for the ENP states that the
relationship must be based on ‘mutual commitment to common values,’ both
in domestic and foreign policy.159 Specific manifestations of this commitment
would be adherence to the rule of law, good governance, respect toward individuals and minorities, good neighbourly relations, a market economy, sustainable development, fight against terrorism, non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, abidance by international law, and peaceful resolution of
conflicts.
In pursuit of all of this, the EU and each neighbouring country formulate an
agreement of co-operation. Together they define the priorities which they can
implement by co-operating. The aim of the Neighbourhood Policy has never
been to force the partner countries to do anything. Instead, the neighbouring
countries are encouraged to move closer to the EU in a voluntary and gradual
way, even though the results of this rapprochement are not really clear. The
priorities are used to draft a plan of action with several sections (political dialogue and reforms; economic and social co-operation and development; trade
issues; judicial affairs and interior affairs; sectoral issues such as energy, transport, environmental protection; and the human dimension, covering things
such as education, health and cross-border co-operation). The action plans are
based on the assumption that the relevant neighbouring country or partner
has already ratified the principal international agreements on fundamental
human rights and freedoms and abides by these agreements. In December
2006, action plans had been implemented in 10 partner countries, and specific
goals and activities had been defined for the subsequent three to five years.
The action plans stipulate regular monitoring and progress reports. The
very first report on the ENP offered a brief and very general look at the vast
scope of ENP activities. It was published on November 22, 2005.160 The second
report was essentially made up of nine separate reports, and it was issued on
■

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 257

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

257

December 4, 2006.161 The set of reports is both general and detailed, and we
will discuss it in greater detail a bit later. We shall try to find an answer to the
question: how successful has the ENP been in implementing the EU common
values? We shall also review the initiatives announced by the European
Commission on December 4, 2006, regarding ways in which the EU can
strengthen relations with its neighbours.
Values in the European Neighbourhood Policy
The ENP documents always present the common, shared values in an attractive way; often, however, the formulations are also vague and inconsistent.
Very seldom are there precise statements as to what those common values are
and how they are manifested. Moreover, the precise statements are not always
identical. A serious shortcoming of the ENP texts is that the concept of values
is never really defined. Definitions are also lacking for other concepts which
could be described as manifestations of those values.
The most concise statement about values and their role in the EU and the
ENP can be found in the ENP Strategy Document of May 2004. We read: ‘The
Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, liberty, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights. These values are
common to the Member States in a society of pluralism, tolerance, justice, solidarity and non-discrimination. The Union’s aim is to promote peace, its values
and the well-being of its peoples. In its relations with the wider world, it aims
at upholding and promoting these values.’162
The document also says that with the ENP, the Union encourages the partners
to make a commitment to the shared values. The further development of relations
within the context of the ENP will depend on the extent to which the common
values of the EU are accepted and implemented.163 That is why action plans include priorities which are aimed at strengthening the commitment to values.164
Even though all of the action plans affirm the importance values in the
neighbourhood policy, there are only three in which there is a precise definition
of this principle. The action plans for Tunisia and Morocco, for instance,
contain an extensive list of values – democracy, the rule of law, good governance,
respect for human rights, a market economy, free trade, sustainable development, reduction of poverty, and strengthening of political, economic, social
and institutional reforms.165 The Israeli action plan, by contrast, lists just

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

258

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 258

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

democracy, respect for human rights, the rule of law and fundamental freedoms. That is because the Union believes that the relationship between Israel
and the EU is already based on common values.166
In response to the question about the shared values on which the ENP is
based, the homepage of the European Neighbourhood Policy states: ‘The ENP
is based on the concept of shared values and common interests. The shared values
are those which ensure our prosperity, stability and security i.e. democratic
reforms (fundamental rights, rule of law), market economy and sustainable
development (including reforms in sectors such as trade, competition, energy
and transport, environment, people-to-people contacts etc). These reforms will
enable us to develop joint responses to the common challenges we face in the
twenty-first century e.g. prosperity gaps, migration, crime, environmental
issues, public health, extremism and terrorism.’167
If we compare these lists, we see that there is no unanimity on the values
formulated, shaped and pursued by the ENP. We also see that the values
which are mentioned most often include liberty, basic freedoms, democracy
and democratic reforms, the rule of law, market economy and sustainable
development. This offers us only an approximation of what the EU considers
to be its common values and how these values are manifested in the context of
the ENP. Thus we are led to conclude that the activities of the ENP which are
pursued in the name of values are based on the assumption that there exists an
undefined but widely accepted understanding of what Europe’s common
values are and are not.
ENP values and European values
Table 2 offers a comparison of the description of values in the aforementioned
ENP documents and in the chapter of this book contributed by Ivars Ijabs. It
should be noted that although values in ENP documents are not categorised,
for the sake of clarity and comparability, in the table below we shall use the
categories proposed by Ivars Ijabs.
This table reveals some serious differences. Many values are listed in just
one column, not both. We also see that sometimes there is talk of comparable
concepts, ones that have been formulated or assigned differently. Why these
differences? How important are they? The scope of this paper does not allow
us to analyse each element of discordance individually, but we can say that the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 259

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

259
Table 2

European values: A comparative view
EU values according to Ivars Ijabs

EU values in ENP documents

Political values
Citizenship
–
Rule of law
Political pluralism
Representation, parliamentarianism

Political values
–
Liberty, fundamental freedoms
Rule of law
Democracy, democratic reforms
Good governance

Nationalism and scepticism about it
Separation of church and state
–

–
–
Strengthening political, economic,
social and institutional reforms

Social values
Individualism
Tolerance
–
Science and innovations
Free time

Social values
Respect for human dignity
Observance of human rights
Equality
–
–

–
Welfare
Competition
–
–

Economic values
Sustainable development
Market economy
Free trade
Reducing poverty

Cultural values
Christianity
Enlightenment
Inner life
Irony
Historicism

–
–
–
–
–

main reason for the differences is the way in which values are classified and
assigned. Another important factor is the significance of individual values in
this context. Thus, for instance, the ENP documents seldom mention culture as
a value, but that should not suggest that the authors of the policy think that
culture and its related values are unimportant. It is more likely that they

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

260

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 260

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

believe that in order to achieve the goals of the policy, they must first focus the
ENP on political, social and economic values.
If we look at the list of ENP values, we must remember that only rarely is
there unanimity about the shared values in policy documents. What is more,
there are many inconsistencies in the classification of values in basic documents
of the ENP. Sometimes concepts are described as values, while elsewhere they
are described as manifestations of values. The ENP action plans for Morocco
and Tunisia, for instance, consider the reduction of poverty to be a value, while
the ENP Strategy Document lists it separately from values.168
A lack of overall unanimity is also admitted by Ivars Ijabs, who points out
in his study that the separation of European values into the political, social
and cultural category is conditional and that the values which are reviewed
here do not form a single, integrated system. That partly explains why the list
of European values presented by Ijabs does not include democracy or a section
on economic values. That is not the only explanation, however, and that is why
Ijabs presents others. Choosing to approach democracy from a broader perspective and not analysing it from the perspective of the ENP, he writes:
‘Values which are important today, such as democracy, individual rights and
constitutionalism, hark back to the ancient ideal of citizenship in Europe –
democracy, individual rights and constitutionalism. True modern democracy,
of course, first developed in the United States, so it cannot really be termed a
European value, but it is European in that modern democracy is based on the
idea of the individual’s political status, namely citizenship.’
Ivars Ijabs also reviews the market economy and other aforementioned economic values indirectly, this time through the prism of competition: ‘Among
other cultures, Europe is distinguished by the belief that competition among
individuals can serve the public interest if it is honest and sensibly regulated.
[..] The market, of course, is the most important area for such productive
competition. [..] One of the greatest achievements of post-war Western Europe
is based specifically in this understanding: a flexible and free market economy
which is, nevertheless, socially responsible.’
The ENP and the introduction of values
Although fundamental questions about the interpretation of values in the
European Neighbourhood Policy still remain, this has not hindered the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 261

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

261

policy’s further development. The practical implementation of the ENP began
two years ago, and development is continuing. At a press conference on
December 4, 2006, the European Commission announced its evaluation of the
work that had been done under the auspices of the ENP and the progress that
had been made in the relevant countries. The Commission also disclosed its
initiatives on the further development of the ENP. The Commission published
nine reports (two general ones, and progress reports about the seven partner
countries). These documents offer us a look at the way in which the ENP has
been implemented and allow us to formulate various general observations
and conclusions about the role of values in the ENP, as well as the development of the ENP in the future. The documents do not, however, answer the
question of what constitutes the EU shared or common values.
A more systematic review of the documents allows one to present several
general observations. Central to the ENP is the desire to promote friendly relations with neighbouring countries on the basis of common values; hence, the
ENP action plans and progress reports speak first and foremost to a closer relationship between the Union and the participating countries. It is through this
prism that the achievement of specific EU-recognised values is understood.
The action plans and progress reports focus on specific activities which promote the development of such links. These activities – possibly larger or smaller
reforms – might mirror only indirectly the specific values. The set of progress
reports, therefore, cannot be seen as a systematic report on or an official assessment of the introduction of EU values. Instead, they are a reflection of the relationship between the EU and the partner country, of the work that has begun.
This is a process in which the achievement of goals is based on the recognition
of common values. As noted above, even if the framework for the action plans
is identical in all cases, the content of the reports is individualised and in line
with each country’s interests, desires and capacities. This applies to mutually
supported priorities, missions and specific activities. All of the work is based
on a mutual investment and on the principle of voluntarism. This also
means that if an action listed in the plan is not pursued, this does not lead to
sanctions. Progress, in other words, cannot be achieved with force or harsh
criticism.
Directly or indirectly, all of these circumstances make it difficult to evaluate
achievements in any objective way. The summary of the progress reports itself
notes that the progress reports do no lend themselves to a cross-country analysis

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

262

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 262

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

on the implementation of the ENP, although some trends can be identified and
compared.169 Keeping in mind these caveatas, let us review Table 3, which
shows the values that are mentioned directly or indirectly in the various ENP
progress reports. We can look at what is happening in the introduction of each
relevant value. The table offers a summary of what is found in the progress
reports and what each country has achieved. The purpose is not to measure or
to compare the overall introduction of EU values in the relevant countries. The
authors have chosen indicators which are fairly conditional – development
(D), activities (A) and stagnation (S). (D) speaks to achievements, (A) – to whether
or not specific things are being done to introduce values, and (S) – to a situation
in which nothing is happening or in which the situation is deteriorating.
An asterisk (*) means that the ENP progress reports make reference to the
relevant values but that implementation thereof has largely or completely
stopped. For instance, the exacerbated conflict between Palestine and Israel in
2006 brought to a standstill the peace process which had begun. The report on
the Palestinian government particularly emphasises the implementation of
positive values until the beginning of 2006, when lawful elections to the Palestinian Legislative Council led to the election of a greater number of Hamas
representatives than of the moderates halted the reform course of the government. In the progress report on Israel, the authors refer to the ‘special status’ of
Israel’s relations with the EU, referring to the EU-Israeli Association Agreement, which has been in force since 1994, as well as to the overall high level of
development in the country. There is also reference to the ENP action plan
which was approved on April 11, 2005, and which is the next step in the development of the bilateral relations. The authors also affirm that since the action
plan took effect, the EU relations with Israel have developed further than ever
before in many areas, including politics, trade and investments, the rule of law,
security, science and technology, as well as education. The progress report,
however, does not overlook the problem areas and deals, in particular, with
Israeli-Palestinian relations; the wording, however, is diplomatic and the fact
that Israel has occupied Palestinian territory for many years is not mentioned
directly: ‘During the initial period of the Action Plan, the EU has been more
closely involved with Israel in the peace process, in particular through a
number of specific actions designed to assist certain aspects of Israeli-Palestinian relations.’ The fact that the column on Israel has the mark ‘–’ alongside
three values means that the values are not mentioned in the report. In the case

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 263

263

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

of the market economy, of course, this can be attributed to the high level of
economic development in Israel.
Table 3

Reflection of EU values in the 2006 ENP progress reports
The situation with values in seven ENP countries170

EU values

Ukraine Moldova Marocco Tunisia

Israel

Palestine

Jordan

Political values
Liberty, basic freedoms

D, A

A

A

S

*

*

A

Rule of law

A

A

D

S

*

*

A

Democracy, democratic
reforms

D

A

D

S

*

*

D

Good governance

A

A

D

S

–

*

D

Strengthening of political,
economic, social and
institutional reforms

D, A, S

D, A, S

A

A, S

A

*

A

Human rights, respect
for human dignity

D, A

D, A

A

S

A

S

D

Equality

D

D

A

S

–

S

A

A

A

A

D

D

*

A

Social values

Economic values
Sustainable development
Market economy

A

A

D

A

–

*

D

Free trade

A

A

D

A

A

*

D

Reducing poverty

S

D

A

A

A, S

*

A

The ENP: an effective policy for spreading common values?
In conclusion, let us return to the two questions which we posed at the
beginning of this section of the compilation:
■ Do the EU common values appear in the European Neighbourhood
Policy, and if so, to what extent?

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

264

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 264

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

How good is the ENP at introducing and implementing these values in
the EU neighbouring countries?
Only general answers can be provided. With respect to the first, we can say
that the ENP really does try to achieve friendly relations with neighbouring
countries, and it does so on the basis of shared, common values. Progress reports about the ENP partner countries show that the process of rapprochement
is based on specific activities intended to help partner countries assimilate the
values in a direct or an indirect way. Some values are consistently emphasised –
democracy, human rights and sustainable development are examples of this.
Other values surface indirectly when discussing the one or the other area. In
addition, there are cases, where the values are not specifically mentioned. The
progress report on Moldova, for instance, contains just one single mention of
market economy, and that is the context of developing strategies for strategic
rather than economic development. Despite all this, one does get the sense in
reading all of the action plans and progress reports that they have been written
on the basis of all of the aforementioned values.
The second question can be answered very directly. The results of ENP
activities are commensurate with the efforts that the two sides have expended.
The authors of the ENP understood this when they said that the ENP is ‘joint
property.’ Full implementation of action plan requirements is still something
for the future, but the most recent reports on the ENP do show the ‘weak points’
in the process, as well as the achievements that have been made in partner
countries and in the Neighbourhood Policy as such. From the perspective of
the ENP, achievements include accomplishments in introducing values, while
failures relate to those areas in which there is stagnation or even decline.
Morocco, Jordan and Ukraine have done well. They are three very different
countries, but they all have stated a clear intention of drawing closer to the
European Union.
Considering the achievements, we must also remember that:
■ positive movement toward the specific goals, which both sides have agreed
upon, is just the start of the road toward developing their relationship in
line with the values which both of them recognise and implement;
■ for partner countries, this process requires many deep reforms which, even
with the best will, cannot be introduced fully in just a few years’ time.
That this could be a long and difficult process is implied by the fact that
only 10 of the 16 countries which are involved in the ENP have their own
■

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 265

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

265

action plan. Table 3 covers only seven countries, and that is because action plans
with Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan took effect only in November 2006. ENP
progress reports, therefore, have not yet been prepared about these countries.
The European Commission is well aware of all of this. The Commission has
reviewed its own work, along with the offer which the EU makes to partner
countries. It has also evaluated the effectiveness of the ENP so far. The conclusion
is that the ENP is necessary and that it has proven its value171 and that is why
the Union must strengthen its links to the ENP. At a press conference on
December 4, 2006, where the progress reports were released, the Commission
announced its conclusions, as well as new initiatives in improving the ENP
and its results. It was declared that the ENP was generally successful, but that
there were also very obvious problem zones. The Commissioner for External
Affairs, Benita Ferrero-Waldner, said that even though economic and political
progress had been made in the neighbouring countries since 2004, poverty,
corruption, unemployment, unbalanced economic development and weak governance continue to be serious problems, as do long-standing conflicts in the
Middle East and the southern Caucasus. These are and will remain challenges
for the EU, said Ferrero-Waldner, because they facilitate illegal immigration,
insecure energy deliveries, environmental damage and terrorism.172 All this
prompted the Commission to draft a new ENP strategic document, which declares that:
■ the ENP budget between 2007 and 2013 will be increased by approximately 32% to a level of 12 billion euros;
■ a Neighbourhood Investment Fund will be set up to encourage developmental banks to offer larger loans to ENP countries in pursuit of greater
development;
■
300 million will be added to the action plan funding so as to strengthen
good governance in the participating countries;
■ there will be a clearer formulation of the ENP vision as to future relations
with the neighbouring countries, offering even closer economic and trade
integration with the EU than could be possible under the auspices of free
trade proposals which have been made before (the ENP, however, still
does not offer neighbouring countries a chance to begin EU membership
negotiations anytime in the future);
■ procedures related to the issuing of visas to known groups of guests will
be improved significantly;

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

266

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 266

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

partner countries will be given a chance to engage in ongoing or ad hoc
meetings with ministers and experts from EU Member States to discuss
subjects such as energy, transport, the environment and health care from
a broader perspective than is possible in bilateral relations;
■ political co-operation and systematic association with the neighbouring
countries about the Common Foreign and Security Policy will be boosted
with regard to the Common Foreign and Security Policy to reach agreement on positions as to international organisations, and to ensure the
participation of neighbouring countries in the agencies of the EU (foreign
policy declarations, positions in international forums as well as participation
in key programmes and EU agencies);
■ the role of the EU in conflict resolution in the region will be made more
effective;
■ there will be a stronger regional approach to the East on the basis of existing co-operation in the Black Sea region.173
All of this shows that the EU is determined to develop the Neighbourhood
Policy and to make it more appealing to and important for the neighbouring
countries. The Union wants the fruits of the policy to be visible and real in the
nearest future. Hence, the development of the ENP is continuing.
In what direction is the ENP moving? Can we conclude that the course
remains unchanged, or are there changes which can be identified? The documents which were published on December 4, 2006, suggest that the course has
not changed, but there may be shifts in emphasis in the future. The new strategic document particularly emphasises economic development and co-operation.
In the introduction we read: ‘The premise of the European Neighbourhood
Policy is that the EU has a vital interest in seeing greater economic development
and stability and better governance in its neighbourhood.’174 Interestingly, the
document has nothing to say about concepts such as values and democracy.
Values have not been completely forgotten, however, because human rights
are mentioned briefly. These are nuances which do not allow us to draw any
far-reaching conclusions, but we should continue to watch the process so as to
see whether the European Commission, in placing an emphasis on economic
development, regional development and good governance, does not ignore
democratic reforms and fundamental freedoms to an excessive degree. If that
happens, that will represent a fundamental shift in the Neighbourhood Policy,
whose defining elements so far have been both interests and values.
■

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 267

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

267

Conclusions
The current and future development of the European Union’s Common
Foreign and Security Policy does not give reason for particular optimism. The
authors of this policy will have to continue to manoeuvre between pronouncements that are made by government officials as to the need for a tighter and
more effective CFSP, with politicians promising that it will be fully in place at
least ‘tomorrow’, and national interests which could be called egotistical, when
it comes to the EU’s joint operations outside of the Union. This situation has
existed for decades, and there is no reason to expect a fundamental shift. This
means that it would be short-sighted for Latvia’s government to emphasise
only joint elements of foreign policy in its own foreign and security policies.
The way in which the CFSP has developed so far clearly confirms several facts
of life which Latvia must keep in mind. First of all, it is comparatively easy for
the EU to reach agreement on foreign policy activities which apply to regions
of the world which have traditionally been the Union’s concern, – northern
Africa is an example. Just because the EU is successful with the CFSP in one
region, however, does not mean that the CFSP will serve as a successful model
for activities elsewhere. Secondly, there is still a vast diversity in views among
EU Member States about the countries and regions which are of particular
interest to Latvia.
It will be important to follow closely the attitudinal developments toward
the changes in the CFSP in different EU Member States. History tells us that in
certain cases even countries which take a supranational approach toward the
future of the EU as a whole choose to use an intergovernmental approach in
specific policy areas. An example of this is France and its relationship to the
European Security Community, which it proposed in 1951 and then killed in
1954 by refusing to ratify it. Relying exclusively on the pronouncements of
politicians – pronouncements which are characterised by the ongoing political
discourse tinted by values and which do not take the long-term interests of the
state into account – can create a false impression of the country’s policies, its
potential allies, and its positions in the future.
It would be risky to set the CFSP apart from the overall course of development of the EU. Since the European Constitutional Treaty was rejected by
voters in France and the Netherlands, countries have become more cautious
about strengthening the joint aspects of EU policy. The Union’s largest and

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

268

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 268

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

most influential countries have shifted their attitudes in this regard. Germany
has become more active as an EU leader, and that is the result of the personality
of Chancellor Angela Merkel, as well as of the fact that her country has taken
over the rotating presidency of the EU. France, meanwhile, has become more
cautious. As Kramer puts it, it has increasingly served its own interests and
withdrawn into a defensive pose.175 France claims to support increased supranational elements in the work of the EU, but this has not been based on any
desire to facilitate the emergence of a Europe which is unified on the basis of
common values. Instead, France’s thinking is based on national interests, including the way in which France can increase its influence in international
politics as a regional and, later, a global power. France has fallen victim to its
own policies, because its people do not support the EU which has been shaped
by the political elite. In international terms, France is not even a regional superpower. Steven Kramer suggests that the activities of French politicians during
the last several years have replaced the dream of a unified Europe which was
proposed by Robert Schuman and Jean Monnet with a union of countries
which ‘is hard to love, of which it is easy to be afraid, and which can be denied
without the slightest regret when voting.’176
Another important issue is how various external factors will affect the
CFSP. Socio-psychological theory, when applied to international relations, tells
us that external pressure leads countries to move toward closer consolidation
and co-operation,177 but the fact is that this principle is not valid in all cases in
the EU (we can point to the war in Iraq, as well as to the EU’s relationship with
Russia). This means that when we evaluate external factors, we must identify
those which will lead to closer integration among EU Member States and those
which may hinder that process. From the perspective of foreign and security
policy, it is evident that the EU will have to review its complicated relationship
with the United States. There are very different relationships between the EU
various Member States on the one hand and the superpower on the other side
of the Atlantic Ocean on the other, but the fact is that all 27 EU Member States
are dominated by strategic relationships of partnership. Washington has said on
more than one occasion that it wishes to see a more consolidated EU, one that
is stronger in the global arena. The EU does not have sufficient economic or
military potential to undertake full responsibility for global processes, and it will
always need strong allies. At the global level, that really can only mean the USA.
Balance between the two sides is the best guarantee of international security.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 269

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

269

Another important factor is NATO. The EU must overcome its inferiority
complex and the resulting biases against the alliance. The sooner the EU is
prepared to develop the structures of co-operation which are already in place,
the sooner it will be able to present itself in the security arena as an important
force in dealing with conflicts in the world. A Litmus test for the EU will be the
way in which relations with Russia are developed and managed. As has been
argued several times in this paper, the EU must decide whether Russia will be
just a supplier of energy, in which case relations will be maintained through a
trade dialogue, or whether Russia will be a country with which the EU must
establish a far broader range of relations. If the latter option is chosen, the EU
will need to review its strategies and tactics, and that will represent a challenge
to the balance of values and interests in the foreign and security policies of the
Union’s Member States.
An analysis of the history and the existing status of the CFSP, as well as of
the position of EU Member States toward the CFSP, allows us to conclude that
a truly common foreign and security policy in the EU will be possible only if
the federalists’ dream of an EU becoming a true state comes true.178 Member
States are not prepared to take this step, however, and that means that at least
for the next decade, the CFSP and its level of consolidation or fragmentation
will depend both on internal factors in the various Member States and on the
regional and international environment which prevails.
Latvia’s position vis-à-vis the CFSP must be based on its own views of the
future model for Europe. In the medium term, Latvia must be prepared to deal
with a ‘cocktail’ of malleable positions and national policies. This means that
we must be ready for several sets of options concerning the foreign and security policy including and to act in line with the desirable version of the future,
the priorities that form the nucleus for Latvia’s position, and the possible areas
of activity where Latvia can participate on the basis of policies that are implemented by other Member States. Latvia’s situation is made more complicated
by the fact that the countries with which the EU has reached or may reach
agreement related to enhancing the integration of the CFSP are not of priority
interest to Latvia – here we refer to the Mediterranean region, Africa and Latin
America. Those issues (energy policy) and countries (Russia, Georgia, Moldova,
Ukraine) which are more central to Latvian foreign policy and which are important for domestic stability and security are also the source of the greatest
contention among the EU Member States, and indeed, these issues are the ones

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

270

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 270

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

which hamper the Union from further developing the CFSP. This ambiguous
situation means that Latvia will have to manoeuvre among the positions of
various Member States within the EU, as well as remain aware of global policy
changes and react appropriately.

References and notes
1 This article, written by Þaneta Ozoliòa, is an analytical compilation of studies by Atis Lejiòð,

Gatis Pelnçns and the study by Dzintra Bungs ‘European Neighbourhood Policy and
Europe’s Common Values.’
2 Ivars Ijabs. Dimension of Values in European Integration. Pp. 13–42.
3 It included France, the United Kingdom and the Benelux countries.
4 See Dedman, M. J. The Origins and Development of the European Union 1945-95. A History of
European Integration. London: Routledge, 1996, pp. 34–93. See also Urwin, D. The Community of Europe: A History of European Integration since 1945. London: Longman, 1995. See
also Young, J. Britain, France and the Unity of Europe 1945–51. Leicester: Leicester University
Press, 1984.
5 Smith, M. Europe’s Foreign and Security Policy. The Institutionalization of Cooperation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004, p. 51.
6 See http://europa.eu.int/comm/external_relations/ceeca/com_strat/index.htm.
7 See Puriòð, G. Thoughts About the Future of Europe: From Market to Country. p. __.
8 Guérot, U., Hughes, K., Lefebvre, M. and Egenhoff, T. France, Germany and the UK in the
Convention. Common interests or pulling in different directions? EPIN Working Paper
No. 7, July 2003. p. 3. See http://www.epin.org/pdf/FDUK_Guerot_Hughes_Lefebvre.pdf.
9 The ESDP is a component of the CFSP. The authors prefer not to split the two policies apart
in this paper, but depending on the context, they do emphasise the greater importance of
defence policy during the last several years.
10 Regelsberger, E. CFSP Watch 2003. National Report Germany. See www.fornet.info.
11 German Defence Ministry Web pages. See www.bmvg.de.
12 White Paper 2006 on German Security Policy and the Future of the Bundeswehr, p. 21. See
www.bmvg.de.
13 German Defence Ministry Web pages. See www.bmvg.de.
14 White Paper 2006, op. cit., p. 17.
15 Ibid., p. 49.
16 Grilli, E. in Smith, K. European Union Foreign Policy in a Changing World. Cornwall: Polity,
2003, p. 73.
17 Guérot, U., Hughes, K., Lefebvre, M. and T. Egenhoff, op. cit., p. 1.
18 Internet homepage of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office. See www.fco.gov.uk.
19 Delivering Security in a Changing World. Defence White Paper, 2003, p. 6. See http://merln.
ndu.edu/whitepapers/UnitedKingdom-2003.pdf.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 271

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

271

20 An agreement between the EU and NATO on formalised institutional co-operation and

the abilities of the EU to make use of NATO’s military capabilities.
21 UK and Global Security, p. 54. See http://www.fco.gov.uk/Files/KFile/DeptReport2004_

Chapter2.pdf
22 Internet homepage of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office. See www.fco.gov.uk
23 Internet homepage of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, op. cit.
24 Ibid.
25 Delivering Security in a Changing World, op. cit.
26 Smith, K. European Union. Foreign Policy in a Changing World. Cornwall: Polity, 2003, p. 73.
27 Internet homepage of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, op. cit.
28 Smith, K. European Union, op. cit., p. 179.
29 Ibid., p. 128.
30 Guérot, U., Hughes, K., Lefebvre, M. and Egenhoff, T. op. cit, p. 1.
31 Gordon, P. France, Germany and the Western Alliance. Boulder, 1995, p. 9.
32 Internet homepage of the French Defence Ministry. See www.defense.gouv.fr
33 Guérot, U., Hughes, K., Lefebvre, M. and Egenhoff, T. op. cit, p. 1.
34 Gordon, P. op. cit., p. 9.
35 Defarges, P. M. CFSP WATCH 2003, NATIONAL REPORT FRANCE. See www.fornet.info.
36 Military Programme Bill of Law 2003–2008. See www.info-france-usa.org/atoz/mindefa.

pdf.
37 Ibid.
38 DeFarges, P.M., op. cit.
39 Corlsnaes, W. Sjursen (eds.). Contemporary European Foreign Policy, p. 227.
40 Internet homepage of the Greek Foreign Ministry. See www.mfa.gr.
41 Frangakis,

N., Papayannides, A.D. and E. Vlioras. CFSP WATCH 2003. NATIONAL

REPORT GREECE. See www.fornet.info.
42 Internet homepage of the Italian Foreign Ministry. See www.esteri.it.
43 Comelli, M. CFSP WATCH 2003. NATIONAL REPORT ITALY. See www.fornet.info.
44 Comelli, M. CFSP WATCH 2005 – ITALY. See www.fornet.info.
45 Comelli, M. CFSP WATCH 2004 – ITALY. See www.fornet.info.
46 Barbé, E. and L. Mestres. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Spain. See www.fornet.info.
47 Ibid.
48 Cameron, F. and Primatarova, A. Enlargement, CFSP and the Convention. The Role of the

Accession States. EPIN WORKING PAPER, No. 5, June 2003, p. 4. See www.epin.org/pdf/
CFSP_cameron_primatarova.pdf.
49 Courela, P. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Portugal. See www.fornet.info.
50 Courela, P. CFSP WATCH 2003 – Portugal. See www.fornet.info.
51 Smith, K. European Union Foreign Policy, op. cit., p. 7.
52 Cameron, F. and A. Primatarova, op. cit..
53 Courela, P. CFSP Watch 2004 – Portugal. See www.fornet.info.
54 Courela, P. CFPS Watch 2003 – Portugal. See www.fornet.info.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

272

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 272

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

55 Courela, P. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Portugal. See www.fornet.info.
56 Glume, G. CFSP Watch 2004 – Belgium. See www.fornet.info.
57 Federal Public Service Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation. See

http://diplobel.fgov.be.
58 Ibid.
59 Prime Minister Vrije Verhofstadt, Universiteit Brussel, on 10 February 2004. In Glume, G.

CFSP Watch 2004 – Belgium. See www.fornet.info.
60 Internet homepage of the Dutch Foreign Ministry. See www.minbuza.nl.
61 Address by the minister of foreign affairs. The Dutch Approach: Preserving the Trinity of

Politics, Security and Development. SID and NCDO Conference on Security and
Development, 7 April 2006, the Hague. See www.mibuza.lv.
62 State of the European Union 2006, p. 11. See www.minbuza.nl.
63 Internet homepage of the Dutch Foreign Ministry. See www.minbuza.nl.
64 Luxembourg’s answer to the TEPSA questionnaire. See www.restena.lu/lcd/cere/f/
groupe/TEPSA%20answer.doc.
65 Taylor, C. European Security and Defence Policy: Developments Since 2003. RESEARCH
PAPER 06/32, 8 JUNE 2006. INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE SECTION, HOUSE
OF COMMONS LIBRARY, pp. 36-37.
66 Internet homepage of the Austrian Foreign Ministry. See www.bmaa.gv.at.
67 Ibid.
68 Ibid.
69 Segur-Cabanac, C. Austria’s Strategic Objectives for Foreign Missions of her Armed

Forces. See www.bmlv.gv.at.
70 Internet Homepage of the Austrian Foreign Ministry. See www.bmaa.gv.at.
71 Campell, Y. and B. Tonra. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Ireland. See www.fornet.info.
72 Strategic Objectives of Malta’s Foreign Policy. Valetta: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2006.
73 Busuttil, S. The EU’s Mediterranean Policy from a Candidate Country’s Point of View.

Paper presented at the international seminar ‘The Mediterranean and Europe: Contradictory or Complimentary’, June 2000. See www.mic.org.mt/EUINFO/subjects/CFSP/
Euro%20Med.htm.
74 Strategic Objectives of Malta’s Foreign Policy. Valetta: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2006.
75 External Affairs Directorate. See www.foreign.gov.mt.
76 Information Tips on Common Foreign and Security Policy. See http://mic.org.mt/
EUINFO/infoslots/subjects/infotips_foreign_security.htm.
77 Melakopides, C. and Kentas, G. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Cyprus. See www.fornet.info.
78 Cameron, F. and Primatarova, A. Enlargement, CFSP and the Convention. The Role of
Accession States. EPIN WORKING PAPER No. 5, June 2003, p. 7. See www.epin.org/pdf/
CFSP_cameron_primatarova.pdf.
79 Melakopides, C. and G. Kentas, op. cit.
80 Melakopides, C. CFSP Watch 2004 – Republic of Cyprus. See www.fornet.info.
81 Turkey Rejects Cyprus Deadline, November 2006. See www.euractiv.com.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 273

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

273

82 Internet homepage of the Cypriot Foreign Ministry. See www.mfa.gov.cy.
83 Statement of government policy, as presented by Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt to the

Swedih Parliament, 6 October 2006.
84 Borg, S. and Herolf,G. CFSP Watch 2005 – Sweden. See www.fornet.info.
85 Sweden is involved in peacekeeping operations in the Balkans, Afghanistan, Liberia and

Indonesia.
86 Statement of government policy in a parliamentary debate on Foreign Affairs, 15 Feb-

ruary 2006. See http://www.regeringen.se/content/1/c6/07/02/30/aaa18caa.pdf.
87 Ibid.
88 Alyson, J., Bailes, K., Herolf, G. and Sundelius B. (eds.). The Nordic Countries and the

European Security and Defence Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006, p. 94.
M. Europe’s Foreign and Security Policy. The Institutionalization of Cooperation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004, p. 258.
90 Herolf, G. CFSP Watch 2004 – Sweden. See www.fornet.info.
91 Lecture by Secretary of State Jukka Valtasaari ‘European Security Issues’, Yonsei
University, Graduate School of International Studies, Seoul, 22 March 2001. See http://
formin.finland.fi.
92 Burtsov, P. CFSP WATCH 2005 – FINLAND. See www.fornet.info.
93 Internet homepage of the Finnish Defence Ministry. See http://www.defmin.fi/index.
phtml?1=en&s=92.
94 Preliminary Agenda for Finland’s Presidency of the EU. Cabinet Committee on
European Union Affairs, 24 May 2006.
95 Strand, J. CFSP WATCH 2004 – FINLAND. See www.fornet.info.
96 Burtsov, P., op. cit.
97 Internet homepage of the Danish Foreign Ministry. See http://www.um.dk.
98 Græger, N., Larsen, H. and H. Ojanen. The CFSP and the Nordic Countries. Four Variations
on a Theme. Kauhava: Kauhavan sanomelehti, 2002, p. 95.
99 Internet homepage of the Danish Defence Ministry. See http://forsvaret.dk/FMN/eng.
100 Græger, N., Larsen, H. and H. Ojanen, op. cit., p. 111.
101 A Changing World. The Government’s Vision for New Priorities in Denmark’s Foreign
Policy. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, June 2003, p. 8. See http://forsvaret.dk/FMN/eng.
102 Carlsen, P. and Mouritzen, H. (eds.). Danish Foreign Policy Yearbook 2004. Copenhagen:
Danish Institute for International Studies, 2004, pp. 11–15.
103 A Changing World…, op. cit., p. 12.
104 Accession to the European Union Brings New Challenges to Czech Diplomacy. Address
presented by Minister Svoboda at the Conference of Heads of Diplomatic Missions. See
www.czechembassy.org.
105 Security Strategy of the Czech Republic, second section. Principles of the Security Policy
of the Czech Republic. See http://www.czechembassy.org/wwwo/mzv/default.asp?id=
24118&ido=7567&idj=2.
106 Ibid.
89 Smith,

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

274

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 274

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

107 Ibid.
108 Gyárfášová, O. and Valášek, T. (eds.). Easternization of Europe’s Security Policy. (2004),

p. 37. See www.visegradfund.org.
109 Khol, R. CFSP Watch 2004 – Czech Republic. See www.fornet.info.
110 Ibid.
111 Strategy of National Security of the Polish Republic. See http://merln.ndu.edu/whitepa-

pers/Poland-2003.pdf.
112 Trzaskowski, R. and Osica,O. CFSP WATCH 2004 – Poland. See www.fornet.info.
113 Cameron, F. and A. Primatarova, op. cit., p. 5.
114 Ierosina veidot ES armiju [Propose establishing an EU army]. Latvijas Avîze. See http://

www.nozare.lv/inf/_defence/item.asp?NewsID=20061106214310020C6A51E38CD156
25&Phase=polija.
115 Osica, O. and Trzaskowski, R. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Poland. See www.fornet.info.
116 Strategy of National Security of the Polish Republic, op. cit..
117 Osica, O. and Trzaskovsk, R. CFSP WATCH 2005, op. cit.
118 Karkoszka, A. The Politics of European Security. Copenhagen: Danish Institute for International Studies, 2004, p. 134. See www.isn.ethz.ch.
119 Kaczyñski, P.M. What Will the New Polish Government’s Policy be in Europe After the
Parliamentary and Presidential Elections? Institute of Public Affairs, 2005. See http://
www.epin.org/pdf/Comment_KaczynskiIPA_Sept2005.pdf.
120 Bilic, V. ESDP and the Security Policy Priorities and Perspectives of Central European
EU Candidate States. Studies in Contemporary History and Security Policy, Vol. 11, 2003,
p. 133.
121 Gyárfášová, O. and Valášek, T. (eds.) Easternization of Europe’s Security Policy (2004),
p. 22. See www.visegradfund.org.
122 Missiroli, A. (ed.). Bigger EU, Wider CFSP, Stronger ESDP? The View From Central
Europe. Occasional Palers, No. 34, 2002, p. 31. See www.iss-eu.org.
123 Ibid.
124 Monitoring Report on the Slovak Republic’s Progress in its Preparation for EU Membership, September 2002–May 2003, June 2003. See http://www.government.gov.sk/eu/
dokumenty/monitor_sprava_092002-052003_en.pdf.
125 Bilic, V. The EDSP and…, op. cit., p. 140.
126 EU Enlargement One Year After – a Slovak Perspective. See http://web.gc.cuny.edu/
Eusc/activities/paper/Vasaryova.htm.
127 Bilic, V. The ESDP and…, op. cit., p. 140.
128 The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Hungary. See http://www.mfa.gov.hu/
kum/en/bal/foreign_policy/security_policy/national_sec_strategy_of_hun.htm.
129 Missiroli, A. (ed.). Bigger EU…, op. cit., p. 37.
130 Gálik, Z. CFSP WATCH 2003. National Report, Hungary. See www.fornet.info.
131 The National Security Strategy…, op. cit.
132 Internet homepage of the Slovenian Defence Ministry. See www.mors.si.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 275

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

275

133 Internet homepage of the Slovenian Foreign Ministry. See www.mzz.gov.si.
134 Ibid.
135 Kajnc, S. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Slovenia. See www.fornet.info.
136 Kajnc, S. CFSP WATCH 2004 – Slovenia. See www.fornet.info.
137 Kasekamp, A. CFSP WATCH 2005 – Estonia. See www.fornet.info.
138 Ibid.
139 The Estonian Government’s European Union Policy for 2004–2006. See
140 Kasekamp, A. CFSP WATCH 2003 – Estonia. See www.fornet.info.
141 Lithuanian

Contribution to Implementation of the European Security and Defence
Policy. See www.urm.lt.
142 Jankauskas, A., Vilpiðauskas, R. and Vinogradnaite, I. (eds.). Central Europe Beyond Double
Enlargement. Vilnius. 2004, pp. 205–207.
143 Latvia’s Fundamental Foreign Policy Positions, 2006–2010. See http://www.mfa.gov.lv/
lv/Arpolitika/pamatnostadnes.
144 National Security Concept, approved February 2, 2005.
145 European Security and Defence Policy. Position No. 1. See www.ppd.mk.gov.lv/ui.
146 Latvia’s Fundamental Foreign Policy Positions, op. cit..
147 Cameron, F. and Primatarova, A. Enlargement, CFSP and…, op. cit., p. 7.
148 Country Profiles. www.fco.gov.uk.
149 BECSA. CFSP WATCH 2005 – BULGARIA. See www.fornet.info.
150 Primatarova, A. The Bulgarian Debate on the Future of Europe. See http://www.epin.
org/pdf/bulgaria.pdf.
151 Internet homepage of the Romanian Foreign Ministry. See www.mae.ro.
152 Romania in the European Union and the Future of Europe. Address by Prime Minister

Adrian Nastase,
European Policy Centre, Brussels, June 6, 2002. See www.eu.int.
153 Cameron, F. and Primatarova, A. Enlargement, CFSP and…, op. cit.
154 See http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/strategy/strategy_paper_en.pdf. More thorough
information about the ENP is found at http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/.
155 Funding from the ENPI will also be available for events in Russia which are organised
under the auspices of the four common spaces.
156 Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia and the Palestinian self-government. Information
about co-operation between the EU And its ENP partners can be found at http://ec.
europa.eu/world/enp/partners/index_en.htm.
157 For more detailed information about the development of the ENP, see Bungs, D. The
European Union, NATO and Their Policies Vis-à-vis Neighbouring Countries, Particularly
in Central Europe (Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova), the southern Caucasus (Georgia,
Armenia, Azerbaijan) and the Russian Federation. In Lejiòð, A. (ed.). Expanded Europe
and its Neighbourhood Policy: The Eastern Dimension. Rîga: Latvian Institute of International Affairs (2005). See http://www.lai.lv/Kopaa_LAT.html. Further references to
this study will be mentioned only with the author’s surname.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

276

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 276

ÞANETA OZOLIÒA, ATIS LEJIÒÐ, GATIS PELNÇNS, DZINTRA BUNGS

158 An emphasis on the altruistic intentions of the ENP can also be seen in an address which

the EU commissioner for external affairs, Benita Ferrero-Waldner, delivered at the 10th
Euro-Mediterranean Economic Transition Conference in Brussels in June 2006. See
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=SPEECH/06/346&format=
HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en.
159 See http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/strategy/strategy_paper_en.pdf, as well as the
columns FAQ and What is the Neighbourhood Policy? at http://ec.europa.eu/world/
enp/. We will address the issue of values further along in this paper.
160 Communication to the Commission: Implementing and Promoting the European
Neighbourhood Policy. See http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec_2005_1521_en.pdf.
161 Progress Reports on Implementation of the European Neighbourhood Policy. See
http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/documents_en.htm.
162 In the European Neighbourhood Policy Strategy Paper, this statement is found under
‘Action Plans – Commitment to Shared Values’.
163 This is an idea which is emphasised in the 10 existing action plans.
164 When it comes to these values, it has to be said, the strategic document itself is a bit
unclear, and the concept might just as well apply to priorities. In either event, reference
is made to strengthening democracy and the rule of law, reforming judicial systems,
fighting against corruption and organised crime, respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, including freedom of speech and the press, facilitating the rights of
minorities and children’s rights, ensuring gender equality, ensuring the rights of labour
unions and other working standards, fighting against torture and mistreatment of individuals, supporting the emergence of the civil society, and co-operation with the International Criminal Court. Also on the list is the promise to support the EU external activities, particularly the fight against terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction, and to observe international laws and efforts to regulate conflicts.
165 See both plans at http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/action_plans/morocco_enp_ap_
final_en.pdf and http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/action_plans/tunisia_enp_ap_final_
en.pdf.
166 See the plan at http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/action_plans/israel_enp_ap_final_
en.pdf.
167 See http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/faq_en.htm#1.3.
168 See the first quote in this section of the paper ‘Values in the European Neighbourhood
Policy’.
169 See Overall Assessment under ‘Progress Reports’ at http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/
documents_en.htm.
170 The report is based on information that has been extracted directly from ENP progress
reports:
Ukraine: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec06_1505-2_en.pdf
Moldova: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec06_1506-2_en.pdf
Morocco: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec06_1511-2_fr.pdf

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 277

The European Union’s Common Foreign and Security Policy in the Crossfire..

277

Tunisia: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec06_1510_fr.pdf
Israel: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec06_1507-2_en.pdf
Palestine: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec06_1509-2_en.pdf
Jordan: http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/sec06_1508-2_en.pdf
171 Strengthening the European Neighbourhood Policy. See http://ec.europa.eu/world/
enp/pdf/com06_726_en.pdf.
172 See http://www.businessweek.com/ap/financialnews/D8LQ7H4O0.htm.
173 See http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/06/1676&format=HTML
&aged=0&language=EN.
174 See http://ec.europa.eu/world/enp/pdf/com06_726_en.pdf.
175 Kramer, S. P. The End of French Europe? Foreign Affairs, July/August 2006, p. 127.
176 Ibid., p. 135.
177 See Mouritzen. H. External Danger and Democracy. Old Nordic Lessons and New European
Challenges. London: Dartmouth, 1997.
178 One of the most interesting offers as to the development of the United States of Europe
in recent years has been made by Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt. See Verhofstadt, G. United States of Europe. Latvian translation. Rîga: Zvaigzne ABC, 2006.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 278

GATIS PURIÒÐ

Thoughts about the Future of the EU:
from Market to State
Back in the early 1970s, when French President Georges
Pompidou first took to speaking airily of a ‘European Union’,
Foreign Minister Michel Jobert once asked his colleague
Eduard Balladur (the future French Premier) what exactly it
meant: ‘Nothing,’ replied Balladur. ‘But then that is the
beauty of it.’1

What exactly is the European Union (EU)? It is likely that no one can find a
very precise answer to this question. At best you will be told that it is a new
supranational entity in the history of the world, one that is still undergoing
development. No one will tell you what might be the possible or desirable
results of this development.
When the ‘fathers of Europe’ started to bring the continent together, they
always produced breathtaking visions, but the fact is that each major step toward integration has been the result of unwilling, difficult and usually long-term
bargaining. Results have always been based on pragmatism and considerations
which are of importance at the given moment.
This is where the ‘impossible’ contradictions of the EU appear. The visionary
nature of the ‘fathers’ who founded the EU has turned into a set of values
which seem not to coincide with the lowlier interests of politicians today. This
problem proves impossible to solve, however, only if we forget that the values
which were formulated back then represented a rationalisation of the interests
which prevailed at that time.
The end of the Cold War caught politicians throughout the world unaware,
and that applied to the European political elite just as much as to anyone else.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 279

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

279

This led to a seemingly qualitative leap toward the further development of a
unified Europe, apparently removing all contradictions between values and
interests. Germany’s reunification led to the emergence of the euro zone, and
the collapse of the Soviet empire forced Europe to seek out instruments for the
redistribution of spheres of influence. An unprecedented wave of EU integration and enlargement began, but it, too, developed without any defined goal.2
Declarations of values were offered instead.
Signatories to the Treaty of Rome derived proposed values from the interests
of their own countries. By comparison, declarations made by leaders today
tend to be abstract, it seems that they have little to do with political reality.
Instead, they serve as a smokescreen for market deals.3
It was only once the so-called EU Constitutional Treaty was rejected by
voters in France and the Netherlands that the European Union really took a
serious look at the question Quo vadis? The failure of the most serious attempt
by the EU to define itself was frightening in terms of what the future would
bring, but that has not disturbed politicians or the EU citizens living their lives
as if nothing had happened. People hope that the ‘perpetual peace’4 which has
existed for the last 60 years will last for at least one more ‘perpetuity’, as will
the nice welfare state in which they live. Tony Judt, a student of the post-war
history of Europe, argues, however, that the EU will not be able to survive
forever as an undefined phenomenon.5 The EU has always tended to flow
along with the stream of events, but this threatens its existence in the future. If
Europe does not define itself on the basis of its ‘national interests’, then it will
be defined by events caused by other rational actors of the international
system. This is even more important for Latvia than to the big powers of
Europe if it is not to fall victim to history once again.

1. The EU between market and state
60 years ago, on September 19, 1946, Winston Churchill delivered the historical address in which he called on the European nations to form the United
States of Europe.6 The project to create a unified Europe began four years later,
in 1950, and with greater or lesser effort, Member States have always been able
to reach agreement on issues of an economic nature. When talk has turned to
foreign policy and defence, however, Member States have almost always

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 280

280

GATIS PURIÒÐ

chosen to preserve the status quo, because these are issues which, by definition,
are the most important elements of an independent state. In June 2000, French
President Jacques Chirac appeared before the German Parliament and once
again confirmed the chilly attitude of national leaders toward Churchill’s
vision. Chirac said that what is needed is ‘a United Europe of States rather
than a ‘United States of Europe.’ He went on to say that ‘neither you [the
Germans] nor we [the French] envision the creation of a European super-state,
which would supplant our nation states and mark the end of their existence as
players in international life. In the future, too, our states will be the main point
of reference for our peoples.’7
The sociology of history tells us that economic integration is usually followed by political integration.8 In the case of Europe, however, there have been
material prerequisites for the next logical step, but the further development of
the Union has largely been hindered by various idealistic constructs. It is often
claimed that the cornerstone for a successful political community must be a
unified identity, with authors arguing that Europeans do not have any sense of
such a community. Identity, however, is largely an imagined concept or social
construct.9 It emerges from the need of individuals and groups to ensure cooperation in pursuit of interests, competing with other groups of individuals
in the battle over limited resources. This means that before we can understand
whether further EU integration is needed and, if so, how far that integration
should go, we must evaluate the likely interests of the EU as a unified and
rational actor on the international stage. Only then can considered policies be
prepared with the aim of creating a common European identity. One must
logically ask, in that case, whose interests the EU might satisfy. Theoretically,
there are at least four categories of interests – the interests of humanity, the
interests of the community of European citizens, the interests of EU Member
States and their citizens, and the interests of the EU as a structure, which exist
in parallel to those of its Member States.
1.1. A global (absolute) EU
The assumption that an organisation which represents one-fifteenth of the
world’s population might have the goal of representing the interests of
humanity seems a priori absurd, but the fact is that such ambitions are, at least,
partially derived from the idea of the EU as a normative power.10 The German

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 281

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

281

sociologist Ulrich Beck, for instance, has proposed the idea of a ‘cosmopolitan
state’ which differs from a traditional nation state in that it emphasises solidarity with foreigners both domestically and abroad.11 This is a utopian idea,
however, and it immediately poses two problems. First of all, why should the
EU citizens of EU Member States be concerned about the entire world?
Second, why should the world accept a situation in which the EU represents
its interests?
There are many psychological reasons why the idea that EU interests overlap with those of humanity may appear in European public discourse. First of
all, individuals and groups of individuals tend to generalise their interests and
apply them to other individuals or groups. In other words, people tend to
universalise their interests, declaring that things which serve the interests of an
individual or a group correspond to things which serve the interests of others –
in this case, those of humanity. Second, many Europeans seek to define an
identity which is quite separate from that of the United States, which dominates in the world. As part of this, they present themselves as defenders of the
Third World. Third, the US nuclear umbrella and the economic boom which was
the result of the US Marshall Plan created greenhouse conditions in Europe
which allowed Europeans to become accustomed to a lifestyle in which existential national interests disappeared and were replaced by so-called post-modern or
post-material values.12
If such psychologically based ideas are to be sustainable, and if they are to be
accepted in the rest of the world at least in part, two necessary but insufficient
conditions must be in place: (1) those who wish to represent global interests
must be part of a globally dominant power; (2) there must be sustainable
opportunities for general growth.13
On the one hand, the EU seems to have the greatest potential power if its
overall GDP is compared to that of other major powers. On the other hand, its
actual military power is fairly insignificant at this time, and it is continuing to
decline in relative terms, at least right now. Other major powers are enhancing
their military power and also experiencing a rapid increase in their latent
power. The EU, meanwhile, is experiencing economic stagnation.
The relative power of the EU is also reduced by the fact that despite its high
level of economic integration, it still cannot be seen as a unified structure in
political terms. The nation states which are its members are still the primary
actors in internal EU relations and in relations with other countries. At least in

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

282

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 282

GATIS PURIÒÐ

certain cases, the relationship among Member States does not add up positively, instead creating a zero sum game. The true power of the EU does not
represent the collective power of all of the Member States, which would be
shown in the following equation: N=n1+n2+… n27, where n refers to the power
of each individual Member State, while N refers to the total power of the EU.
Instead the equation is this: N=(n1+n2+…+n27)-[(n1-n’2)+(n1-n’3)+…(n1-n’25)+
(n2-n’1)+(n2-n’3)+…(n27-n’26)], where n’ represents the lost level of power
in contacts among the relevant Member States. This represents a zero sum
game.
Robert Kagan argues that this is specifically why ‘Europe is turning away
from power, or to put it a little differently, it is moving beyond power into a
self-contained world of laws and rules and transnational negotiations and cooperation. It is entering a post-historical paradise of peace and relative prosperity, the realisation of Kant’s ‘Perpetual Peace’.’14 At the same time, however,
the USA, according to Kagan, is still stuck in history and is continuing to focus
on traditional realpolitik because it has sufficient power to implement such
policies. At the regional level, other major powers are doing the same.15
The Iraq crisis, proved that the United States not only wanted to, but was
also able to pursue its own political course while ignoring the various rules of
international organisations. The EU, upon encountering this bit of reality, did
not present itself as a rational and unified actor. Instead, each Member State tried
to act in accordance with its particular ideas as to its own national interests.16
Eastern European countries, anxious of their own security, ‘amorally’ joined
the ‘aggressive’ invading force led by Washington. Paris, for its part, defended
the interests of French oil companies in Iraq, and it ‘morally’ refused to join in
‘aggression’ against a sovereign country. Because of these internal contradictions
and sense of insecurity, the EU was even unable to deal with the crisis in the
Balkans without US involvement – a territory which is in the EU sphere of
influence, both from the perspective of traditional realism and of the formal
distribution of power on the European continent today.
On the other hand, the rest of the world is not prepared to accept the EU as
a representative of its interests, even if the power deficit of the Union is not
taken into account. As Carr has pointed out, those who do not experience a
similar improvement in welfare think that the concept of harmonised interests
is hypocritical, and they revolt against it. When hegemonic domination of the
market is replaced by a system in which everyone competes against everyone

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 283

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

283

else, the idea of harmonised interests loses importance.17 Empirical data show
that most people in the world have no reason to feel satisfied with life.
At the turn of the 20th century, the inhabitants of the world’s richest countries
represented approximately 20% of the global population but consumed more
than 80% of global GDP. The inhabitants of the bottom 20% of the world’s poorest
countries, in turn, had to make do with just 1% of global GDP. It has been said
that the free movement of goods, finances and individuals covers the whole
world, that this economic activity should promote an overall expansion in
wealth. The reality is that the gap between the rich and the poor is not shrinking,
but it is expanding. In 1960, the top 20% of the wealthiest inhabitants of the world
had 30 times more resources than the bottom 20% of the poorest inhabitants,
but by the end of the 20th century the proportion was 78:1.18
There is also no reason to hope that the standard of living in the Third World
might rise to the current standards in the West, because the resources available
to humanity are limited. The global ecological system simply could not withstand such a burden.
The paucity of resources cannot be prevented unless it is possible to intensify
the use of existing ones or to find new resources which have not been available
until now. In either case, rich countries cannot reduce the consumption of
resources so as to redistribute them to the poor countries, because achievement
of one or other of the stated goals will require maximal use of existing resources in rich countries. This means that redistribution of the world’s material
resources is possible only on the basis of ethical or altruistic motivations or,
perhaps, through violence. A flourishing economy and its benefits are very
important resources for power, however, and it is quite questionable whether
rich countries will, for reasons of ethics, be prepared to waive their influence
in the international system voluntarily so as to help those who are impoverished
in other parts of the world.19
We must conclude, therefore, that even if the EU really is a new kind of
international actor, one which subordinates the interests of the group which it
represents to the interests of all of humanity as a species,20 the fact is that it
does not have the resources needed for such idealistic plans, and humanity is
not prepared to accept such ‘altruism’.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 284

284

GATIS PURIÒÐ

1.2. The EU as a community of citizens
The assumption that the EU is a rational and unitary player in the international system, one which represents the interests of its community of citizens,
seems to be far more logical than the aforementioned and purely theoretical
idea that it represents the interests of humanity. This, too, is a questionable
idea, however. Before the EU can really represent the interests of its citizens, it
must ensure two aspects. First of all, the community of EU citizens must exist
as a group of people who are really unified by their interests – people who can
understand unity and wish to maintain it on a sustainable basis. Second, there
must be a mechanism which makes it possible to formulate the group’s
common interests and project them in contacts with the external world or with
others (strangers) in the international system.
There is reason to doubt whether these two prerequisites could ever be
ensured. According to Judd, ‘because it [the EU] is not a state – because its citizens’ primary loyalties remain to the country in which they find themselves,
whose laws they obey, whose language they speak and whose taxes they pay –
the EU has no mechanism for determining or enforcing its own security interests. [..] The European Community and its successor the EU have for many
decades been extremely effective in advancing and defending their interests in
international forums and against foreign competitors. But those interests have
from the outset been defined in overwhelmingly economic – or more precisely,
protectionist – terms.’21
No matter how people try to explain the ‘no’ vote which was cast by the
citizens of France and the Netherlands in May and June 2005 when they were
asked to vote on the EU Constitutional Treaty,22 the fact is that voters in both
countries were also denying the existence of a community of European citizens. The vote reflected contradictions between the so-called ‘old’ EU Member
States and the Eastern European countries which had just joined the community of Europeans, as well as between the so-called Anglo-Saxon and the European social model. The director of the Centre for European Reform, Charles
Grant, has argued that voters did not have a clear sense of the goals of the EU’s
future existence, nor the real borders of that existence.23 Accordingly, there
was also no definition of who should be included in the community of ‘Europeans’. There was no sense of the characteristics of individuals who shape the
community – characteristics which would allow members to differentiate

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 285

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

285

between one’s own people and strangers. The ethnic researcher Jack Snyder,
writing about the theory of collective action, argues that ‘successful groups [..]
producing collective goods, such as the infrastructure of defence and economies, need boundaries to exclude non-contributors and to identify outsiders
who might act opportunistically in transactions with group members. They
also need boundaries to prevent crowding, which would diminish the value of
membership in the club.’24
On the one hand, the previously described inequality at the global level
continues to govern the internal affairs of the EU, albeit to a lesser extent. This
causes a diversification in the interests of Member States, and that makes it
more difficult to establish a common identity for EU citizens. On the other
hand, the situation is made all the more complex by the EU’s ‘endless’ process
of enlargement. Citizens in the ‘old’ EU have not yet been able to form a
common identity, and they have, with great difficulty, reconciled with the ‘noncontributors’ who have recently been admitted to the club (Polish plumbers,
for instance). Now they have to deal with new and ever new ‘non-payers’ who
are coming through the EU’s door. Bulgaria is an example of this. What is more,
each new round of enlargement means that the community of EU citizens will
be expanded with poorer people who bring with them even greater cultural
diversity.
What is more, consolidation of the European community of citizens is by
no means promoted by the discourse of political correctness which dominates
at this time, because the multicultural and cosmopolitan approach which is
proposed therein is in direct contradiction to the known psychological mechanisms for consolidation of large groups. This does not help in the social construction of European identity. This, in turn, allows political parties which are
populist and Euro-sceptical to enhance their popularity.
In addition to the fact that there is a shortage of psychological mechanisms
to encourage the emergence of a European community of citizens, there are
also very weak mechanisms for political consolidation. The only representative institution which all EU Member States have in common is the European
Parliament. This could be an analogue to national legislative institutions, but
in fact it is, at best, a consultative institution. The existence of the European
Parliament at such a politically unimportant level does not promote the emergence of a community of EU citizens. On the contrary, it has a negative effect
on any such process.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

286

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 286

GATIS PURIÒÐ

The EU is not a federal structure, and this means that the European Parliament, even though it is a directly elected unicameral body of representatives,
cannot depict the proportions of political forces in the EU’s Member States. If
the European Parliament, for instance, is dominated by right wing parties, that
by no means suggests that the same is true in all of the parliaments of Member
States. Political power truly rests in the hands of national parliaments, and
nothing has changed in this regard. This means that EU Member States may be
pursuing rightist and leftist policies all at the same time, but if there is not a
federal mechanism to reduce the political contradictions and to reach a level of
harmonisation, the relationship among Member States becomes contradictious,
and this problem can even be exacerbated artificially.
The absence of a federal structure also means that there are no mechanisms
which, in a democracy, ensure that the minority yields before the majority.
Suppose that the European Parliament, while dominated by politicians from a
certain wing of the political spectrum, approves a declaration which is not
legally binding but does foment political discourse. Suppose further that the
declaration is in contradiction to the positions taken by a Member State which
is ruled by politicians from the opposite political wing. In that case, the majority
of citizens in that Member State will consider the EU’s institutions to be alien
and hostile, they will feel that those institutions should be attacked. This may
encourage people to have a hostile perception of other Member States and their
citizens, too, thus deepening the existing objective contradictions. A democratic
nation state with more or less stable political processes ensures the so-called
political pendulum – power is taken by right wing and left wing politicians in
turn. At the level of the EU, by contrast, the political pendulum is by no means
synchronised.
It must be understood here that the unsynchronised nature of the political
pendulum in the EU is enhanced by the unsynchronised nature of economic
cycles. Different Member States are at different phases of the economic cycle.
When there are politically determined contradictions in the economic courses
that are pursued by the various countries – ones which are enhanced by the
unsynchronised nature of economic cycles – protectionism becomes the simplest
and most predictable response. The rejection of the European Constitutional
Treaty, particularly by France in May 2005, largely represented the protectionist
reaction of ‘old’ Europe against the lower labour costs, relatively younger
populations and lower tax rates of the new Member States of the European

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 287

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

287

Union. The fact is that these advantages have ensured that the newcomers are
serious competitors in the battle over attracting investments.25
EU citizenship as a political instrument is also nothing more than a derivation of citizenship in the Member States. This encourages citizens to link their
primary identity to the Member State in which they live, although on the other
hand, as the different Member States have diverse rules as to naturalisation
and immigration, it is difficult for the indigenous population of a single Member State to identify with the newly created citizens of another Member State.
For instance, if Germany were to naturalise the Turks who live in that country,
at least some ethnic Germans would perceive them as ‘political Germans’, but
it is likely that no Latvians would perceive them as Germans or Europeans,
and vice versa.26
All of this allows us to conclude that none of the initially mentioned prerequisites exists in reality, or perhaps these prerequisites (a group of people
unified by interests who understand and wish to maintain this unity, as well as
a mechanism which makes it possible to formulate the group’s common interests and to project these in contacts with others, with aliens) are still in their
infancy. Neither are there concepts as to the establishment or construction of
these prerequisites – concepts which are defined and more or less politically
and publicly accepted. The assumption that the EU represents the interests of
its citizens’ community in the international system, in other words, is false.
1.3. The supranational EU (a Europe of Nations)
If, as is suggested above, the EU cannot be seen as a representative of humanity or even of its citizens’ community in the international system, then it is
only logical to assume that the EU represents its Member States and, via them,
the interests of the citizens of those Member States. This suggests that when
the EU presents itself as a participant in the international system, it is more of
a traditional international organisation, more of a ‘regional UN’. The UN,
however, is an organisation in which only 15 of the 191 member states make
up the Security Council, which is the only part of the organisation which has
the right to take binding decisions on security issues. Only five countries,
furthermore, are permanent members of the Security Council, and only they
have the right of veto. By comparison, all 27 of the EU’s Member States have
veto rights.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

288

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 288

GATIS PURIÒÐ

As has been noted before, the interests of EU Member States are by no means
homogeneous. Each Member State has veto rights on foreign policy issues,
and that means that in the international system, the EU can, at best, represent
those interests which are the lowest common denominator among the Member
States. The veto rights could be eliminated through the process of so-called
qualified majority voting. In that case, there could be no more talk about the
idea that the EU represents the interests of all of its Member States, because the
interests of some Member States would be excluded in certain situations.
Ignoring the national interests of an actor in international politics if those
interests concern national security and survival is an example of casus belli.
Another problem is differentiating between the interests of Member States
and those of their citizens. EU Member States are democratic by definition, so
their interests should reflect those of the majority of citizens, not those of a
narrowly drawn political elite. If the interests of the majority of citizens are
excluded, then there is reason to question the idea of a common EU society.
There are people who face discrimination because of their nationality, for instance.
This is yet another obstacle against the emergence of a unified community of
EU citizens.
The EU could also serve as a forum for the national interests of its Member
States, which is what the UN does. In that case, the vector for the EU as an
organisation and, even more, as a rational and unitary participant in the international system becomes unclear. If interests of Member States coincide, further
integration is possible, but on the other hand, if interests are contradictory, then
the Union must continue to exist in latent form or even collapse altogether. We
all know that power in the international system is dynamic, it tends to increase
or decrease both in absolute and in relative terms. This applies to individual
countries, including EU Member States, and it applies to relations with third
party countries. This means that the projection of national interests can be
short-lasting. Accordingly, the existence of the EU as a forum of interests is in
contradiction with the ultima ratio of its establishment – limitation of nationalism
as a result of the fact that if individual countries have national interests, the
moment inevitably arrives at which contradictions become insuperable and the
continent must return to the situation which governed before both world wars,
i.e., it must deal with circumstances of historical anarchy.
In a situation of anarchy, an alliance is the typical result of the common
national interests of various countries. There are both formal and factual

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 289

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

289

reasons to doubt whether the EU might exist as this kind of expression of
common interests. The 1992 Maastricht Treaty speaks to the Common Foreign
and Security Policy (CFSP), and the 2001 Nice Treaty clearly defines the need
to establish a common EU defence, but the fact is that the EU and its Member
States do not offer any security guarantees to each other.
From the perspective of security policy, in other words, the EU is more reminiscent of a collective security system. Henry Kissinger has pointed out that
unlike alliances which ‘are created when a group of countries decides to defend
a territory or fundamental principles’ or when ‘a line is drawn and it is declared
that crossing it is a casus belli [..], a collective security system does not define
the territory to be protected or the resources to be used for that purpose; it is
first and foremost a purely legal concept. [..] When all participants agree, the
need for collective security is minimal; when their views differ, it is impossible
to implement it.’27
It is understandable, therefore, that once the Cold War came to an end, the
existing and potential EU Member States which felt a deficit in security
decided to join the Transatlantic security community instead of creating a new
alliance within Europe.
One can claim, accordingly, that the EU presents itself as a representative of
its Member States only in part when it comes to the international system. It
does so only in those cases when the interests of all Member States coincide.
1.4. The bureaucratic EU
If the EU does not pursue the interests of humanity or its community of citizens in international contacts, or if it pursues the interests of Member States
only to a limited extent, then one can assume that the process is based on the
interests of an entity or actor that is diverse from aforementioned ones. In
other words, we could assume that the EU is an entity which stands apart from
its Member States and citizens. Usually this separation is perceived through
the concept of ‘the bureaucracy of Brussels.’
Any organisation, irrespective of its initial goals, expresses its specific interests
over the course of time. These interests are based on the organisation’s need
for self-reproduction and expansion. Brian C. Smith has written about major
administrative organisations as political systems which stand apart from various
interest groups. Smith argues that various interest groups form coalitions with

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

290

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 290

GATIS PURIÒÐ

certain parts of an administration so as to influence the political agenda and
the decisions that are taken. Bureaucratic agencies, for their part, pursue their
specific interests through the support of their clients. This means that bureaucracy can mobilise and regulate pressure groups so as to influence the development of public policy. A modern country demands a larger bureaucratic
apparatus, and this expands the capacity of ‘expertise’ of this apparatus in
comparison to political leaders. Indeed, the structures often have a monopoly
on ‘expertise,’ because laws that are approved by politicians cannot deal with
every possible contingency, the values of individual bureaucrats inevitably
have an effect on the way in which policies are implemented. Each agency
tries to maximise its power and the resources which are given to it. Smith also
emphasises, however, that bureaucrats are paid by the state, and their jobs
tend to be strictly and, usually, narrowly defined.28
Bureaucracy, thus, can perhaps be seen as another actor in the process, one
with its separate and specific interests. On the other hand, dependency upon
the state is a prerequisite for the existence of bureaucracy. This, in turn, means
that the interests of bureaucracies cannot be in contradiction to the interests of
the states which finance them.
In the EU, there is no political superstructure of this kind, and this can create
the impression that bureaucracy in the Union is autonomous. It is premature,
however, to declare bureaucratic ‘sovereignty’ in the EU, because the fact is
that EU bureaucrats operate exclusively on the basis of authorisation from the
political elites of the various Member States, and representatives of those elites,
in turn, are dependent upon their voters. Any authorisation, after all, can be
withdrawn. If the EU were to cause serious losses to a significant share of citizens
in a Member State, the threat of withdrawing authorisation would become
very real, indeed. If the losses occurred in a large and wealthy Member State,
then financing could be withdrawn, too. Consider the United Nations. Its leading
source of financing has always been the United States, but the USA has been
using UN budget subsidies for some time now to influence the organisation’s
policies. In 2005, other wealthy western countries began to do the same, demanding bureaucratic reforms at the UN. Voters are likely to support their governments in such cases, because governments provide them with existentially
important public products – security first and foremost. According to Michael
Reisman, ‘international bureaucracy lacks the resources and the incentives
necessary to fulfil the essential value demands that individuals make on their

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 291

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

291

political communities: security, productive economic arrangements, health
services and the various ‘safety nets’ in the event of recession or calamity.’29
This means that EU Member States and their citizens may well review their
relationship with the EU if it turns into a parallel bureaucratic apparatus
which pursues interests that are regularly in conflict with those of the Member
States and citizens. Authorisation can be limited, financing can be halted, or
Member States may even decide to withdraw from the EU or to talk to other
Member States about shutting the Union down entirely. The EU bureaucracy
can pursue its particular interests only insofar as these are not in serious
contraction to the majority of citizens in the majority of EU Member States.
1.5. The EU as a sui generis structure30
As noted, there are certain difficulties in determining those interests which
the EU might represent as an actor in the international system. Students of the
EU are seldom bemused by this fact, because the EU is often described as a
fundamentally new (sui generis) actor on the international stage. Specialists try
to differentiate between the EU as an institution on the one hand and its interests on the other. Sometimes they even seek to substitute values for interests.
This represents an effort to construct a political entity which simultaneously
serves as a model for an ideal world where values prevail over interests. This
ideal world would be governed by a harmony of interests, and things would
be done because they are good, not because they are necessary. The problem is
that the concept of needs would have to be eliminated before this goal could
be achieved – needs which have always been the decisive factor in the international system.
One of the prophets of such idealistic constructions is Ian Manners, who has
proposed that the EU be perceived as a normative power that can be compared to previous leading actors in the international system – those which used
to be known as superpowers and which derived their influence specifically
from military power. The main component for the normative power of Europe,
argues Manners, is the fact that the EU differs from previous political entities
and that this encourages it to act in a normative way. Manners believes that
there are three reasons why this is true. First there is the historical context –
after the Second World War, the EU was established through a process in which
Member States ceded sovereignty so as to rid themselves of nationalism.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

292

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 292

GATIS PURIÒÐ

Second, the EU is a hybrid entity – it uses both supranational and national
forms of governance. Finally, the constitutional norms of the EU include the
principles of democracy, the rule of law, human rights and social justice, and
this shapes the Union’s international identity.31
Robert Cooper, a former foreign policy advisor to British Prime Minister
Tony Blair, argues that the EU Member States have become post-modern states.
These, he writes, are typified by the following things:
1) no differences between domestic and foreign policy;
2) mutual intervention by countries in areas which have traditionally been
seen as internal affairs, along with mutual oversight;
3) rejection of the use of force in dealing with mutual conflicts, instead
making consistent use of a codified system of self-control in observing
the rules of international behaviour;
4) less meaning for borders, both because of shifting roles for states and of
the development of modern technologies;
5) security is based on transparency, mutual openness and dependency, as
well as mutual vulnerability.32
These and similar ideas could be considered seriously, perhaps, if they
were applied only to politics within the EU. Once they are applied to the global
international system, however, it is easy to see that other actors do not perform
on the basis of rules which are proposed by the idealists. This means that implementation of those rules would require overwhelming power. The EU
could then be compared to empires of the past in establishing Pax Europeana,
just as the Roman Empire established Pax Romana, and the British Empire
formed Pax Britannica. That, of course, would by no means correspond to the
ideas which supporters of normative Europe hold when it comes to that which
is good and that which is evil.33
When the literature presents the EU as a normative power, the dominant
view is that the EU prefers civilian to military instruments. Back in 1972,
Francois Duchêne proposed the idea that Europe could expand its model of
stability and security through economic and political, not military resources.
This, according to Duchêne, created the power of the European Community as
a new international actor.34 As has been pointed out, however, Kantian Europe
is perhaps Kantian specifically because of its weakness.
Descriptions of the EU as a normative power are often based on comparisons to the United States, which openly uses military force to disseminate its

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 293

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

293

value system globally and to create Pax Americana. At the same time, there is a
long-lasting tradition of describing US policy as idealistic.35 I do not see any
reason to think that the EU is fundamentally different from the USA. Both
were established on the basis of ideals and common values which represented
a rationalisation of the important interests of the specific period in time.
In drawing parallels between the EU and the USA, moreover, it must also
be remembered that the history of the latter is four times longer than the
history of the former. This suggests that in its future development, the EU may
pursue a similar course of action to that which was pursued by the USA. At
the beginning, the USA was not a state, it was a sui generis entity which, to a very
large extent, was similar to the transitory EU of the present day. The situation in
the USA differed at that time, however, in that it was geographically isolated
from the international system.36 As Kissinger has noted, that was a time when
American leaders ‘imagined a world in which countries behaved as partners
in co-operation, not as untrustworthy competitors. American leaders rejected
the European idea that the morals of states are based on criteria other than
those of the morals of the individual.’37 Thomas Paine observed that war is
nothing more than the result of a poor system of governance and that war can
be prevented if governments are based on ‘the right principles.’38 When modern
European integration began, the geographic isolation of the USA was replaced
or compensated by the Iron Curtain and the American nuclear umbrella. The
welfare which this created for Europeans allowed them to develop the illusion
of transition toward a post-modern world.
Under these isolated circumstances of post-modernity, relations among
European countries were largely depoliticised, and this created the illusion
that the political regularities described in international relations by realists
were no longer valid. According to Carr, the term ‘political’ is not to be applied
to all of the activities of a state, but only to those which relate to the conflict of
power. Once a conflict is resolved, the issue is no longer ‘political’, it is instead
one of a routine administrative nature. When countries work with one another
to provide postal or transport services, to prevent the spread of disease or
drugs trafficking, these are ‘non-political’ or technical activities. As soon as such
an issue involves the power of one country in relation to the power of another,
however, the issue once again becomes political.39 Politics returned to international relations when the Cold War ended and the discipline of alliances created
under the aspects of a bipolar confrontation deteriorated.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

294

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 294

GATIS PURIÒÐ

The distribution of power in the world today probably does not satisfy
anyone, because:
1) the ‘West’ has no absolute and global monopoly on power, which means
that the ‘West’ is always threatened by those countries which are dissatisfied with its dominance in the international system or with the
distribution of resources in the world. In line with the theory of a balance
of power, it would be logical if the ‘West’:
a) tried to enhance its global positions on the basis of its current
dominance,
b) tried to prevent the emergence of a unified ‘anti-Western’ alliance,
instead seeking to make use of regional contradictions and attracting
individual non-Western countries as allies or compradors;
2) countries which are unhappy with the dominance of the ‘West’ have
limited resources of power, and so they are trying to:
a) avoid any open conflict with the ‘West’ while simultaneously trying
to achieve the status of hegemony in their own region so as to
increase their power in the international system,
b) make use of the internal contradictions of the ‘West’ so as to prohibit any consolidation of the ‘West’ in a way which would ensure
its irreversible hegemony in the international system.
That is why ‘Western’ countries are countries of the status quo in that they
maintain or enhance their dominant positions in the international system which
prevails today. Other, ‘non-Western’ countries, thus, can be seen as revisionist
countries. It is likely that in the future, ‘the main problem will be the disappointment of countries which are catching up with the West. Eventually they
will doubt the sensibility of their hurriedly altered socio-political and economic
foundations. There will also be increasing offence among those elements
which have been rejected by society. They will respond to forced attempts at
recultursation with flashes of violence. The time will come for a ‘conflict among
civilisations’, for a rebellion of the poor against the rich, for a violent redistribution of the shrinking resources of the world.’40 Under such circumstances
any desire to preserve the EU as a sui generis entity would be suicidal.
‘Unified Europe’ emerged as a direct response to the Cold War, and its form
was in line with the ‘quasi-war’ circumstances which prevailed at that time.41
When the Cold War ended, this was no longer possible, and the EU had to
adapt to circumstances of ‘quasi-peace’. Forms appropriate for an anarchic

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 295

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

295

environment had to be defined – a conglomerate of unevenly integrated countries
had to be transformed into a federation of countries, into the ‘United States of
Europe.’ The EU can exist as a sui generis entity only in transitory terms. Sooner
or later it must return to normalcy, to the status of a state. The only question is
whether the EU will become a super-state or whether it will once again be
replaced by the major powers of the European continent competing amongst
themselves.

2. The new European project: from market to state
Everyone seems to understand that ‘the influence of [European countries]
in the future will depend on how they manage to strengthen their unification
in the European Union. A unified Europe will be a major power once again. If
it breaks up into nation states, it will have only secondary status,’ as Henry
Kissinger has put it.42 In the official discourse, however, the establishment of a
federative Europe is being replaced by something that is called ‘deeper integration.’ Preservation of the sovereignty of EU Member States is also being
emphasised, as noted before. Since political power and the resources of that
power are still organised on the basis of nation states, power is still concentrated
in London, Paris and Berlin, not in Brussels, if we look at the EU from the
perspective of international relations.
I believe that there are three fundamentally important circumstances which
hinder any clear formulation of the further developmental goals of the EU:
1) there are still contradictions among Member States, there is a divergence
in their understanding of the nature of threats in the international environment;
2) leaders in Member States are dependent on national electorates which
do not wish to yield their political control by delegating the political
power of their national leaders to the impersonal and alien bureaucracy
of the EU;
3) the political leaders of Member States, too, do not wish to transfer power
to the EU level without closely monitoring it, because at the Union level,
no clear mechanisms for delegating power exist, and neither are there
any clear promises as to the political careers of national leaders.
The opportunities which were created by the establishment of the European Convention, alas, were wasted. The very first mistake was that the

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

296

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 296

GATIS PURIÒÐ

‘fathers’ of the Convention immediately turned to the preparation of a ‘European Constitution’ instead of using their far-reaching mandate to launch a
pan-European discussion about the goals and policies of the EU in the 21st
century. The Convention failed in creating a document which could be seen as
a true Constitution from the legal and the political perspective.43 This mistake
was based on the desire to discuss the EU at the theoretical level through institutional and policy analysis, concentrating on abstract administrative schemes
and ignoring existentially important issues. This was true even though, as the
founding fathers of the United States put it, ‘the issue concerns nothing more
or less than the survival of the Union, of its security, of the welfare of its components, and of the destiny of what, in many ways, is the most interesting
empire in the world.’44
The idea of ‘Europe’s core’ can be seen as a certain attempt to overcome these
obstacles. On May 31, 2003, two of the giants of European intellectual discourse,
Jürgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida, proposed their ideas on the future of a
unified Europe and its foreign policy: ‘During the Brussels Convention, the opposition has become plain to see among those who seek a genuine strengthening
of the EU and those who have an understandable interest in freezing the existing mode of intergovernmental administration as it currently exists, or at best
in only making cosmetic changes to it. Now the existence of this animosity can
no longer be hidden. [..] To avoid the disintegration of Europe, these countries
[‘of core’] must immediately enact the mechanism of ‘enforced co-operation’
established at Nice in order to form not only a common foreign policy but also
a common security and defence policy. [..] This will create a benchmark which
other members will not long be able to ignore.’45
Six months later the leaders of France and Germany were calling for an
enhanced process of EU integration through the creation of the core of Europe.
This would mean closer relations among these countries in institutional terms
(the possibility of a common military and foreign service, a seat at the UN
Security Council) and at the political level (common positions and actions).
Understandably, this bit of news upset some of the EU existing and future
Member States, because such integration would mean the emergence of a powerful political and economic centre within the EU. The initiative has all but collapsed at this time, even though it is still frequently discussed in the public
discourse. The idea of a European core was intended to promote integration,
but in reality it simply expanded the gap between the old and the new

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 297

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

297

Member States, increasingly pushing Eastern Europeans toward the United
States in terms of security concerns.
These results are only logical, because the first of the aforementioned obstacles
against the further unification of Europe cannot be removed unless the two
other problems are resolved together – i.e., if there is no debate about the transformation of the structure of EU political power, introducing clear principles
of federalism instead.
First of all, the EU must get rid of its limited perception of security policy.
Right now that policy is focused mostly on peacekeeping operations in Third
World countries which are of little significance to the citizens of Europe – the
Democratic Republic of Congo, for instance. From the perspective of international
politics, this demands the establishment of unimportant joint police forces.
Expansion of the perception of security must be based on a return to the
traditional theory of international relations. Threats must be seen where they
are – in large countries which exist outside the post-modern world. These are
seeking to consume a significant share of limited resources, and as they become
stronger in economic terms, they are also accumulating military power which,
in the future, could be turned against Europe’s national interests. As the discourse on security is expanded, Europe must simultaneously constitute itself
as a unified and rational actor on the international policy stage. I believe that
there is only one way to overcome the existing alienation between the EU and
its citizens, as well as among the EU Member States — the creation of a political
structure which allows the citizens of the EU Member States to formulate and
agree on interests which they have in common while also regulating contradictions which exist. Such a structure must include a bicameral parliament,
one which involves representation of political forces, as well as equal representation for Member States. There must also be an executive structure or
‘cabinet’ that is responsible before this parliament. Furthermore, the competences of the federal institutions and federal countries (into which existing EU
Member States would turn) must be strictly defined and separated.46
A federal EU would seemingly diminish the influence of individual Member
States, but the importance of the citizens of all Member States would increase,
and inevitably there would be a confluence of currently diverse national interests. The eastern border of Latvia would be perceived by EU citizens as the
eastern border of their own country, not as that of Latvia, which is found
somewhere in Eastern Europe. It is also very unlikely that a European super-state

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

298

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 298

GATIS PURIÒÐ

would allow any third party to interfere in the internal affairs of the union or
its federal lands. This would eliminate the situation which Latvia faces now –
ongoing complaints about the supposed violation of international human
rights which are inspired by third countries.
If, in this context, I ask myself what I want and do not want for the EU, then
as an individual, I can certainly say that as a consumer, I want security and a
full stomach. As a shareholder in the company which is called ‘Latvia’, I do not
want anonymous bureaucrats in Brussels to impinge upon my national identity by interfering in the way in which my country grows strawberries or
dictating the size of the berries.
I believe that the interests of Latvia, as a small country, would be well served
if ‘high politics’ were transferred from London, Paris and Berlin to Strasbourg
and Brussels. Then we might finally be able to participate in the development
of those policies. When Brussels starts to deal exclusively with ‘high politics’,
it will probably leave the size of strawberries up to the federal states, which
will be in line with the principle of subsidiarity. Who will care about strawberry plants if the debate is about bombing Teheran? Politicians from the larger
countries will find that such a federal Europe opens up tempting career opportunities. If someone were to become prime minister of the European superstate, Europeans would at long last be able to feel that they are equals when
that prime minister speaks to the man or woman in the White House.
Paradoxically, but it is specifically the small countries of Europe which are
most interested in the further development of federalism in the EU. The process which we know as globalisation does not reduce the strength of the state
as an institution. On the contrary, it demands greater strength. Big European
countries cannot hope to balance out the hegemony of the USA in the foreseeable future, but they do find their place in the international system. Small
countries, by comparison, have limited resources of military, economic and
political power, and these are insufficient to allow any small country to be
truly independent in dealing with the challenges of the modern world. As Carr
has pointed out, utopians sometimes denounce the ‘alleged “dictatorship of
the Great Powers”’ as an immoral policy which is occasionally pursued consciously by certain countries, but the fact is that the process instead creates
something similar to the ‘law of nature’ in international politics.47 This is
manifested through a situation in which smaller and weaker countries gather
around larger and stronger ones. If Latvia wishes to survive in the anarchic

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 299

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

299

environment of the present day, it will have to count on this law as it pursues
its foreign policies. Given that the interests of states can shift, it is in the interest
of Latvia to find itself in a more stable entity than a group of friends.
I see little point to the European effort to sniff at the prospects that are
proposed by US history, choosing instead to present Europe as something unique
in the history of the world. As Jonathan Clark wrote in The Times during the
European Convention, ‘the true discussion occurred and was concluded long
ago. The true discussion of the advantages of federalism occurred in 1787 and
1788, when the United States of America debated ratification of their Constitution.’48 While the Americans agreed to establish a unified country, the Europeans remained apart, and over the last 100 years, they have carefully forged
US hegemony.49 This creates such great concern among European intellectuals
who, at the same time, are snooty in rejecting any use of American resources in
the forging of European power.
Were Europe to transform itself into a state, that would resolve the last confusing issue about Europe’s borders and community of its citizens. If Europe
reconstituted itself into a state, further enlargement would be limited both
internally and externally. Admission to the club, which currently are determined
by a narrow political elite, would be controlled through the mechanisms of
democracy by the people of Europe. On the other hand, other countries would
no longer see EU enlargement as a situation in which new Member States join
an international organisation or, at worst, as a situation in which the sphere of
influence of the EU’s major powers expands. Instead, this would be seen as
annexation, and military confrontation could be the only possible response to
it – provided that other concerned states had sufficient power and resources.50
If ‘us’ are kept apart from strangers (‘them’), that creates good conditions
for solidarity among club members, as opposed to competition against the
outer world. The raison d’être for the EU’s ongoing existence must be sought
out in statehood, which would give Europe sufficient power resources in the
battle over its national interests in the international system. The continent will
be protected against the possible return of anarchy, and this political entity
will be given purpose and value(s) in the eyes of its citizens.
In conclusion, I should like to refer to words that were spoken by one of the
fathers of the United States, Alexander Hamilton, in 1787: ‘Is it not time to awake
from the deceitful dream of a golden age and to adopt as a practical maxim for
the direction of our political conduct that we, as well as the other inhabitants

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 300

300

GATIS PURIÒÐ

of the globe, are yet remote from the happy empire of perfect wisdom and
perfect virtue?’51 When Europeans try to determine the goals of further EU
existence, they should understand that they are in the same phase of history
which their American brethren faced more than 200 years ago. The future of
Europe depends on the courage of the Europeans, on their ability to overcome
their narrow national interests in pursuit of common interests. As the founder
of unified Europe, Robert Schuman, put it when discussing the situation in his
own country at the end of the Second World War, if France did not join in some
broader alliance, ‘Malthusianism will wipe it from the face of the Earth.’52

References and notes
1 Judt, T. (2005) Postwar: A History of Europe Since 1945. London: William Heinemann, p. 733.
2 Politicians who, in the case of the EU, operate at the level of Member States and thus act

on behalf of national interests and under the ‘oversight’ of voters often cannot afford to
state such goals openly. On the other hand, the EU gained a certain amount of independence from its founders when the Cold War ended, and just like any other organisation, it
seeks to ensure its self-reproduction. In quantitative and qualitative terms, EU enlargement can be seen as bureaucratic inertia in which the process itself is the goal.
3 It is no accident that ‘horse trading’ is one of the most ‘popular’ euphemisms in describing
the way in which the EU takes decisions.
4 One of the most common conceptualisations of the EU makes direct reference to
Immanuel Kant’s work which refers to ‘perpetual peace’. For the Latvian translation see
Kants, I. Mûþîgu mieru [Perpetual Peace]. In: Kants, I. (2005) Kas ir apgaismîba? [What is
Enlightenment?]. Rîga: Zvaigzne ABC, pp. 98–137.
5 Judt, T., op. cit., p. 728.
6 See ×åð÷èëëü, Ó. Vbhjdjq rhbpbc% Fdnj,bjuhfabz. Htxb. [Churchill, W. Global Crisis:
Autobiography. Speeches]. Ìîñêâà: Ýêñìî, 2003, ñ. 761–766.
7 Hay, W.A. Quiet Quake in Europe: The French and the Germans Divide. Watch on the
West: A Newsletter of FPRI’s Centre for the Study of America and the West, Vol. 1, No. 9,
October 2000.
8 Bourdieu, P. Rethinking the State: Genesis and Structure of the Bureaucratic Field.. In:
Steinmetz, G. (ed.). State/Culture. State-Formation After the Cultural Turn. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press (1999), pp. 53–72.
9 That does not, however, mean that the creation of such social constructs does not emerge
from so-called human (social/political animal’s) nature.
10 The second issue of the Journal of European Public Policy in 2006 is devoted entirely to an
analysis of the EU as a normative power, with this concept being explained at three levels –
(1) the ontologically qualitative level, i.e., conceptualising the EU as an organisation

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 301

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

301

which changes the international system and its norms; (2) the positively quantitative
level, i.e., describing the EU as an important participant in international relations, one
which acts to pursue change in the international system and its norms; and (3) the normatively qualitative level, i.e., arguing that the EU must act so as to disseminate its values
and norms in the international system. See Manners, I. Normative Power Europe
Reconsidered: Beyond the Crossroads. Journal of European Public Policy, Vol. 13, 2 March 2006,
pp. 182–199.
11 Beck, U. Terror and Solidarity. In: Leonard, M. (ed.). Re-Ordering the World. London: The
Foreign Policy Centre (2002), pp. 112-118. David Held has presented similar ideas about
cosmopolitan democracy, and that is in line with the idea of a ‘normative’ Europe. Held
has written about global legislative institutions, and he considers the European
Parliament to be a prototype for such institutions. He argues that such institutions must
first and foremost be ‘standard-setting’ institutions. See Held, D. Models of Democracy, 2nd
ed. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000, pp. 353–360.
12 Ronald Inglehart has studied the results of World Values Surveys and concluded that (1)
the priorities of individuals are based on ‘insufficiency’ or the lack of something; (2) the
personal value orientations of the individual reflect the situation which has governed his
or her period of socialisation. See Gjkbnbxtcrfz yferf% yjdst yfghfdktybz. Ðåä. Ð. Ãóäèí,
Õ. Ä. Êëèíãåìàíí. [A New Handbook of Political Science. Eds. Goodin, R. E., Klingemann,
H. D.]. Ìîñêâà: Âå÷å, 1999, ñò. 335. For this reason, post-modern (post-material) values
which emphasise the importance of self-expression in contrast to reliance upon authority,
tolerance vis-à-vis other groups, and perception of exotic things as stimulating and interesting, as opposed to threatening – these values emerge under conditions when the primary
needs of individuals for food, housing, clothing and a sex partner have been satisfied. See
Inglehart, R. Globalization and Postmodern Values. Washington Quarterly, Vol. 23, No. 1,
Winter 2000, pp. 215–228.
13 According to Edward Carr: ‘The supremacy within the community of the privileged
group may be, and often is, so overwhelming that there is, in fact, a sense in which its
interests are those of the community, since its well-being necessarily carries with it some
measure of well-being for other members of the community, and its collapse would entail
the collapse of the community as a whole. In so far, therefore, as the alleged natural
harmony of interests has any reality, it is created by the overwhelming power of the privileged group…’ Later on he writes – British statesmen in the 19th century were sincerely
convinced that in enhancing the welfare of the British Empire the welfare of the whole
world is enhanced. Given the global importance of the British economy at that time, this
assumption was, to a certain extent, true. See Carr, E.H. The Twenty Years’ Crisis 1919–1939:
An Introduction to the Study of International Relations. New York: Perennial, 2001, pp. 80, 81.
14 Kagan, R. Power and Weakness. Policy Review, No. 113, June/July 2002, pp. 3–28.
15 Russia has seen a catastrophic diminishment in its potential power since the collapse of
the USSR. In 2004, its national budget was equal to the spending level of New York City,
but against the background of increasing energy prices, it has started to demonstrate

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

302

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 302

GATIS PURIÒÐ

more muscle. The EU has, as a result of this, started to understand how dependent it is on
Moscow. The reaction of EU Member States to this offers another example of how the
contradictory interests of its members reduce the ability of the Union and each Member
State to pursue its special interests to a full degree. The clearest illustration of this is the
disgust of Poland and the Baltic States over the pact struck between Germany and Russia
over the construction of a gas pipeline, with the EU striking a pose of ‘neutrality’ in this
regard. Poland, as a result, sabotaged the EU-Russian co-operation agreement. Warsaw’s
less than diplomatic decision in this case must be seen as a desperate statement taken by
‘Polish pigs’ which have been forgotten by pig farmers in Brussels.
16 According to Kagan, this is what ‘weaker powers have wanted from time immemorial.
[..] In an anarchic world, small powers always fear they will be victims. Great powers, on
the other hand, often fear rules that may constrain them more than they fear the anarchy
in which their power brings security and prosperity.’ It is likely that this position does not
show us that some European countries are idealistic warriors on behalf of peace. Instead,
we are given to understand that these countries are engaging in calculations of realpolitik
because they understand their own weakness. On the other hand, Europe’s weakness
means that the primary target of revisionists is the United States as the only global superpower which has undertaken to preserve the status quo. But Europeans, despite their
publicly stated anti-Americanism, trust the idea that if they are faced by real threats, the
United States will offer a solution as deus ex machina. Kagan has described this international situation with considerable imagery: ‘The real division of labour consisted of the
United States making the dinner and the Europeans doing the dishes’. See Kagan, R., op. cit.
17 Carr, E.H., op. cit., p. 82.
18 According to a 2005 UN report on global development, the situation did not change in the
early 21st century either. During the last decade, the world’s poorest countries have not
only been unable to draw closer to the world’s most developed countries, they have actually fallen further behind. In 1990, the average income of Americans was 38 times higher
than the average income of a Tanzanian. In 2005, the difference was already 51 times over.
Statistics, of course, are comparable to magic in that data can be juggled in various ways
so as to achieve ‘miracles’ which the viewer can understand. Growth rates in China and,
to a lesser extent, India suggest that the trend which began in 1820 has shifted direction
since 1992, and the gap between the rich and the poor has started to shrink. If, however,
the economies of the United States, Europe and Japan were to stop developing, then India
could reach the level of currently developed countries by 2106, Latin America could do so
by 2177, and Africa could achieve it by the year 2236. At the same time, most of the other
developing regions (i.e., those other than China and India) are sinking into even greater
poverty. Relative growth rates, moreover, by no means depict the true increase in welfare,
because the starting point for the various countries has been very diverse. Thus, for
instance, if the economies of Sub-Saharan Africa and Europe were both to expand by 3%
this year, then the annual income of each African would increase, on average, by USD 51,
while each European, on average, would get an extra USD 845. See Human Development

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 303

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State

303

Report 2005. International Cooperation at a Crossroads: Aid, Trade and Security in an
Unequal World. New York: Hoechstetter Printing Co. for the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 2005, pp. 36–37.
19 In accordance with the aforementioned study of global values, so-called post-modern
values can exist only in welfare societies where per capita income is at least at a level of
USD 10,000 per year. Accordingly, ‘poor’ people for whom post-modern values are ‘alien’
will not be prepared to accept the domination of the ‘rich’ if the process means that they
are supposed to accept the western lifestyle, and that is true even if the ‘rich’ are prepared
to offer certain ‘dividends’ to the ‘poor’. See Inglehart, R. Globalization and…, op. cit.
Even more, there is no reason to feel that the EU budget is sufficient to finance the transfer of post-modern values at the planetary level.
20 Evolutionary biological data indicate that it is impossible to create a situation in which
individuals or groups of individuals subordinate their interests to the interests of an
entire species. According to Richard Wrangham and Dale Peterson, in any species of
animals, ‘any behaviour occurring regularly or consistently has a logic embedded in the
dynamics of natural selection for reproductive success [..] Animals have been selected
over evolutionary time to do whatever it takes to advance an individual’s own genetic
interests, even when those interests look unpleasant or contrary to well-being of the
species as a whole.’ See Wrangham, R. and Peterson, D. Demonic Males: Apes and the
Origins of Human Violence. Boston/ New York: A Mariner Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company,
1996, pp. 138 and 159. Nearly 150 years before the cited book was written, Charles Darwin
wrote in his seminal work that ‘If it could be proved that any part of any one species had
been formed for the exclusive good of another species, it would annihilate my theory, for
such could not have been produced through natural selection.’ Darwin, C. The Origin of
Species by Means of Natural Selection or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for
Life. New York: Bantam Books, 1990, p. 167. This gives reason to ask why natural laws
might not apply to the species of homo sapiens even if the species is also homo europeicus.
21 Judt, T., op. cit., p. 734.
22 It has been said that the vote in France and the Netherlands was due not to a dislike of the
treaty as such, but rather to vast dissatisfaction about domestic, economic and social
problems. According to this idea, there was also increased disappointment in the traditional governing parties of the two countries, complete with fears caused by ambiguous
phenomena such as globalisation and immigration. These are issues which European citizens often – and, in the eyes of many observers, inappropriately – attach to the EU.
23 Grant, C. Brussels Burnout. Time, Vol. 165, No. 24, 13 June 2005, pp. 17–21.
24 Reisman, M. Designing and Managing the Future of the State. European Journal of
International Law, Vol. 8, No. 3, 1997, pp. 409–420.
25 Gilbert, M. Europe Looks for a New Narrative. World Policy Journal, Vol. 22, No. 3, Fall
2005, pp. 53–60.
26 This is not meant to suggest that the situation would automatically improve if there were
a joint EU naturalisation service and if the functions were put into the hands of anonymous

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

304

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 304

GATIS PURIÒÐ

bureaucrats in Brussels. On the contrary, that would enhance alienation between Member
States and the EU, as well as among the Union’s citizens.
27 Êèññèíäæåð, Ã. Ye;yf kb Fvthbrt dytiyzz gjkbnbrf* R lbgkjvfnbb lkz XXI dtrf. [Kissinger, H. Does America Need a Foreign Policy?: Toward a Diplomacy for the 21st
Century]. Ìîñêâà: Íàó÷íî-èçäàòåëüñêèé öåíòð Ëàäîìèð, 2002, ñò. 30, 31.
28 Smith, B.C. Bureaucracy and Political Power. Sussex: Wheatsheaf Books/ New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1988, pp. 1–4.
29 Reisman, M. Designing and…, op. cit.
30 This is a Medieval Latin term which was initially used in scholastic philosophy to describe an idea, entity or phenomenon which cannot be included in a broader concept or
structure. The term was later absorbed into the legal system, using it to describe legal
classifications which exist independently from other groups or categories because they
are unique or specially created.
31 Manners, I. Normative Power Europe: A Contradiction in Terms? Journal of Common Market
Studies, Vol. 40, No. 2, 2002, pp. 235–258.
32 Cooper, R. The Post-Modern State. In: Leonard, M. (ed.). Re-Ordering the World. London:
The Foreign Policy Centre, 2002, pp. 11–20.
33 Even John J. Mearsheimer, who represents the concept of offensive realism, admits that in
parallel to egotistical survival needs, countries sometimes really do try to pursue other
goals, but they can afford this luxury only as long it does not come into conflict with the
logic that is dictated by the balance of power or strength. Otherwise the result is usually
negative. Mearsheimer suggests that if major powers wish to survive, they must always
act as good offensive realists. See Mearsheimer, J.J. The Tragedy of Great Power Politics. New
York/London: W.W. Norton & Company, 2003, pp. 12 and 46.
34 Sjursen, H. The EU as a ‘Normative’ Power: How Can This Be?. Journal of European Public
Policy, Vol. 13, No. 2, March 2006, pp. 235–251.
35 See, e.g., Kissinger, H. Diplomacy. Latvian translation. Rîga: Jumava, 2001, p. 1005.
36 Hendrickson, D.C. Of Power and Providence: The Old U.S. and the New EU. Policy
Review, No. 135, February/March 2006, pp. 23–42.
37 Kissinger, H. Diplomacy, op. cit., p. 25.
38 Paine, T. Rights of Man. Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Classics of World Literature, 1997,
p. 127.
39 Carr, E.H. The Twenty Years’…, op. cit., p. 102.
40 Denemark, R. World System History: From Traditional International Politics to the Study
of Global Relations. International Studies Review, Vol. 1, No. 2, Fall 1999, pp. 167–199.
41 For more about this, see Puriòð, G. Starptautisko attiecîbu reâlisma skolas teorija kâ
piemçrotâkais instruments Eiropas Savienîbas pçtniecîbâ [The Theory of the School of
Realism in International Relations as the Most Appropriate Instrument in Researching
the European Union]. Politikas zinâtnes jautâjumi, Vol. V, Rîga: LU Akadçmiskais apgâds,
forthcoming.
42 Kissinger, H. Diplomacy, op. cit., p. 849.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 305

Thoughts about the Future of the EU: from Market to State
43 Cohen-Tanugi,

305

L. The End of Europe? Foreign Affairs, Vol. 84, No. 6, November/
December 2005, pp. 55-67.
44 Atlthfkbcn% Gjkbnbxtcrbt 'cct Fktrcfylhf Ufvbkmnjyf> L;tqvcf V'lbcjyf b L;jyf L;tz.
[Hamilton, A., Madison, J., Jay, J. The Federalist: A Commentary on the Constitution of
the United States].Ìîñêâà: Âåñü Ìèð, 2000, ñ. 29.
45 Habermas, J., Derrida, J. Nach dem Krieg: Die Wiedergeburt Europas [After the War: The
Rebirth of Europe]. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. 31 May 2003.
46 The conditional distribution of competence between the EU and the Member States can
be seen as upside-down at this time, and it certainly does not correspond to the much
discussed principle of subsidiarity. Issues of so-called high politics are still resolved by
national governments, while at the ‘federal’ level, decisions are taken on things such as
food safety, the ownership of brand names, and such existentially unimportant issues as
human rights in Chechnya or the creation of a Palestinian state.
47 Carr, E.H., op. cit., p. 105.
48 Clark, J. Europe and the Myth of America’s Constitution. The Times, 29 May 2003.
49 It was as late as 1896 that the last Kaiser of Germany, Wilhelm II, called on European
nations to come together against the future economic and political dominance of
America. As we all know, Europe instead decided to go to war. See Kennedy, P. The Next
American Century. World Policy Journal, Vol. XVI, No. 1, Spring 1999, pp. 52–58. See also
Òýéëîð À. Äæ. Ï. <jhm,f pf ujcgjlcndj d Tdhjgt 1848–1918. [Taylor, A.J.P. The Struggle
for Mastery in Europe 1848–1918]. Ìîñêâà: Èçäàòåëüñòâî èíîñòðàííîé ëèòåðàòóðû,
1958, ñ. 44.
50 To be sure, it is possible that the sui generis existence of the EU actually hides some excellent plan for annexation and that when the limits of natural expansion are reached
through peaceful means, it will wave a magic wand and turn into a state.
51 Atlthfkbcn% Gjkbnbxtcrbt 'cct Fktrcfylhf Ufvbkmnjyf> L;tqvcf V'lbcjyf b L;jyf L;tz.
(Hamilton, A., Madison, J., Jay, J. The Federalist: A Commentary on the Constitution of the
United States) Ìîñêâà: Âåñü Ìèð, 2000, ñ. 58.
52 Êîóêåð, Ê. Cevthrb Pfgflf. [Coker, C. Twilight of the West] Ìîñêâà: Ìîñêîâñêàÿ øêîëà
ïîëèòè÷åñêèõ èññëåäîâàíèé, 2000, ñ. 128.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 306

The authors

Daunis Auers is a lecturer at the Department of Political Science , University
of Latvia. He earned his Ph.D. from the School of Slavonic and East European
Studies at University College London, and his Master’s degree at the London
School of Economics. He is the vice-president for academic development of
the Association for the Advancement of Baltic Studies. He was a Fulbright
scholar at the University of California, Berkeley, in the 2005–2006 academic
year. His major research interests focus on political parties, party systems and
the democratisation of post-Communist countries, as well as higher education
policy, and European Union enlargement.
Dzintra Bungs is the author of many studies about the Baltic States and the
USSR which have been published by Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe.
After the restoration of Latvia’s independence, she focused mostly on issues
concerning the Baltic States, the European Union and NATO. Dr Bungs is the
author of the book ‘The Baltic States: Problems and Prospects of EU Membership’,
which was published in 1998 by the Foundation for Knowledge and Policy in
Germany. She is a Senior Research Fellow for the Latvian Institute of International Affairs and a holder of the Latvian Order of Three Stars.
Ivars Ijabs is a doctoral student and lector at the Department of Political
Science of the University of Latvia. He has studied philosophy and political
science in Latvia, Germany and Iceland and is the author of many scholarly
and popular articles, as well as translations of academic literature. Ivars Ijabs
has received scholarships from the Eurofaculty Rîga, the Konrad Adenauer
Fund and the University of Latvia (the Morbergs scholarship). His research

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

The authors

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 307

307

interests focus on the discourse of the civil society in modern political theory,
the history of political ideas in Latvia, and analysis of political discourse.
Ivars Indâns received a Master’s degree in political science at the University of
Latvia and is a researcher for the Latvian Institute of International Affairs. His
research interests focus on the development of public processes in the context
of international relations. He has written about immigration and free movement of labour, as well as public integration processes in the context of
European Union policy. Ivars Indâns has served as an expert in evaluating EU
Structural Fund projects in the area of employment – a process which is organised by the Latvian Ministry of Welfare.
Andrejs Jakobsons received his Master’s degree in economics at the Indiana
University in the United States and currently is a researcher for the Baltic
International Centre for Economic Policy Studies (BICEPS). His research focuses
on macroeconomic analysis, the international economy and the labour market.
Andrejs Jakobsons is presently participating in a Welfare Ministry study, ‘An
Optimal System of Taxes and Allowances to Promote Employment.’
Kristîne Krûma is a lecturer at the Riga School of Law and a doctoral student
at Lund University in Sweden. She has been a guest researcher at the Centre
for Migration Rights at Radboud University (the Netherlands) and the Max
Planck Institute for Comparative Public Law and International Law in Heidelberg (Germany). She has also been trainee in the Legal Service of the European
Commission. Kristîne Krûma is a member of the Odysseus Network, which is
an academic network for legal studies on immigration and asylum in Europe.
She also is on the Editorial Board for the Baltic Yearbook of International Law
and a member of the young scholars forum of the Strategic Analysis Commission. In January 2007, she was nominated by the Cabinet of Ministers to be
Latvian arbitrator of the OSCE Court of Reconciliation and Arbitration.
Atis Lejiòð is the founder and director of the Latvian Institute of International
Affairs, specialising in Transatlantic relations, the EU Common Foreign and
Security Policy, the EU Neighbourhood Policy, and energy security. He has
taken part in international working groups on reforms of Georgia’s security
sector and the elaboration of a security strategy for Armenia. Atis Lejiòð is a

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

308

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 308

The authors

member of the Bertelsmann Foundation’s ‘Strategy Group on the Future of
Europe’ and the ‘EU-Consent’ project on the future of Europe vis-à-vis the ENP
and CFSP.
Professor Þaneta Ozoliòa is head of the Department of Political Science of the
University of Latvia and chairwoman of the Strategic Analysis Commission of
the President of Latvia. Her research interests focus on European integration,
EU and NATO enlargement, international and regional security, as well as
security in the Baltic Sea region. Dr Ozoliòa is the author of more than 70 scholarly articles and editor of several publications. She serves on the Foreign
Affairs Council of the Latvian Foreign Ministry and the Consulting Council of
the Latvian Institute. She has served as an expert in the drafting of Latvia’s
National Development Plan and Latvia’s growth model. She regularly delivers
lectures at foreign universities.
Gatis Pelnçns is a Master’s degree student in political science at the University
of Latvia. He earned his bachelor’s degree in political science in 2006. He is coauthor of a book on the Baltic Sea region after the enlargement of the European
Union. In November 2006 he took second place in a competition of scholarly
articles for students, ‘Security Challenges and NATO in the 21st Century’, with
his paper ‘NATO in the War on Terrorism’. Since August 2006, Gatis Pelnçns is
working as a senior desk officer at the Planning Control and Analysis division
of the Latvian Defence Ministry’s Policy and Planning Department. His research
focuses on security, international politics, terrorism, environmental policy and
the Baltic Sea region.
Gatis Puriòð received his Master’s degree in political science at the University
of Latvia in 2006 after defending the thesis ‘The European Union as an Actor in
International Relations: A View from the Perspective of Realism in International Relations Theory.’ He works as an analyst for the Latvijas Fakti social
research company and is working toward his doctor’s degree.
Iveta Reinholde earned her doctorate in political science at the University of
Latvia and is an assistant professor at the Department of Political Science of
the same university. Her research interests focus on issues of public governance and administration in Latvia and the European Union. She has studied

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

The authors

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 309

309

the pace and effectiveness of governance reform in Latvia, and she has reviewed
the way in which the EU influences public governance in its Member States.
Toms Rostoks earned his Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees in political science
at the University of Latvia and is now a lector at the university’s Department
of Political Science. He has studied at the Northern European Institute of
Humboldt University in Berlin and, as a Fulbright scholar, at Rutgers University in the United States. Toms Rostoks has authored several scholarly
publications on regional co-operation in the Baltic Sea region, Kaliningrad,
relations between Latvia and Russia, Latvia’s interests in the European Union,
and Latvia’s developmental co-operation policy. His research interests concern
regional co-operation in the Baltic Sea region, analysis of Latvia’s foreign
policy, and the external relations of the EU.
Inga Ulnicâne-Ozoliòa is a researcher for the Advanced Social and Political
Research Institute of the University of Latvia and the Centre for Science and
Technology Studies of the Latvian Academy of Sciences. She has participated
in international and European research projects on innovation and science
policies and evaluations, the development of universities, and the field of new
technologies. She teaches international political economy and public administration at the University of Latvia and is pursuing her doctorate at the Central
European University in Budapest. Her Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees are in
political science. Inga Ulnicâne-Ozoliòa has also studied at universities and
research institutes in Oslo, Umeå, Prague, Madrid, Hamburg and Brussels. She
is active in the European Political Science Network epsNet.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 310

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 311

Strategic Analysis Commission
under the Auspices of the President
of the Republic of Latvia

Latvia’s View of the Future
of the European Union
“Zinâtne” Publishers
Rîga 2007

Edited by REGÎNA JOZAUSKA
Desktop publishing by GUNDEGA KÂRKLIÒA

Published by “Zinâtne”,
Akadçmijas laukums 1, Rîga, LV-1050.
Licence No 40003576967.
Printed by a/s “Preses nams”,
Balasta dambis 3, Rîga, LV-1081.

Latvijas_skat_uz_ES_anglu.qxd

12.02.2008

10:00

Page 312

