Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

3URFHGLD
(QJLQHHULQJ

Procedia
Engineering
1 (2009)
1–3
Procedia
Engineering
01 (2009)
000–000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

Mesomechanics 2009

Mesomechanics 2009 Foreword:
Dissipation and damage across multiple scales in physical and
mechanical systems
George C. Siha, Alexander M. Korsunskyb,*, Daniele Dinic
a

International Center of Sustainability, Accountability and Eco-Affordability of Large Structures (ICSAELS ) Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA
18015, USA
b
University of Oxford, Department of Engineering Science, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK
c
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, Exhibition Road, SW7 2AZ, London, UK
Received 15 May 2009; revised 20 May 2009; accepted 1 June 2009

The annual international meetings in the Mesomechanics series are sponsored by the
International Society of Mesomechanics with the long term mission to enhance the design and
fabrication of engineering systems, large or small.
Addressing energy efficiency and environmental concerns require science and engineering to
stand on equal footing. Within the scope of this general theme, the Mesomechanics 2009
conference being the 11th in the series will be hosted by the University of Oxford, and coorganised by Imperial College London, and Lehigh University, USA. The conference is
concerned with the “Dissipation and Damage across Multiple Scales in Physical and
Mechanical Systems”. The meeting will take place in Oxford, United Kingdom, on 24-26 June
2009.
Non-linearity of the system response to externally applied loads and physical fields is associated
with the presence of various dissipative and/or irreversible processes. Dissipative processes are
synonymous with the concept of ‘damage’. Damage induces modification and degradation of
system properties, and also determines the durability of the system, i.e. the time and conditions
for the onset of catastrophic failure.
In many physical and mechanical systems the precise nature of dissipative processes varies
depending on the scale of consideration. At the macroscopic, or continuum scale these

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1865 273043; fax: +44 1865 273010.
E-mail address: alexander.korsunsky@eng.ox.ac.uk

doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2009.06.002

2

G.C. Sih et al. / Procedia Engineering 1 (2009) 1–3

phenomena are represented through the introduction of complex constitutive laws. These
continuum quantities reflect the consequences of dissipative processes that take place at lower
structural scales, e.g. intergranular and intragranular deformation in metallic polycrystals,
interfacial decohesion processes in ceramic aggregates, crystalline and amorphous phases in
polymers.
The advent of nanotechnology has drawn attention to the difference between the behavior of
large and small bodies that are governed, respectively, by the bulk (global) and microscopic
(local) material properties. The physical laws are also different. Simply put, the volume governs
the large and the surface controls the small. The distinction is particularly important for
evaluating the energy dissipation. Although the scheme of unloading a tensile specimen may be
adequate for large bodies, it is inappropriate for small bodies. Testing a small part of an
inhomogeneous material microstructure is not sufficient for complete characterization. Relating
the microstructure constituents and the behavior across the different scales is indeed a formidable
task. Of particular concern are the uncertainties associated with interfaces, whether they define
grain boundaries or atomic clouds. Yet, these are precisely the locations where energy
dissipation is dominant. Describing the accumulation of dissipated energy from the micro- to the
macro-scale involves crossing the divide between the large and the small. Newtonian/Einsteinian
mechanics does not concern itself with attempting to reconcile the descriptions at the level of
quantum mechanics (the extremely small) and gravitational theory (the extremely large).
Ignoring the arrow of time in the quantum gravity theory is equivalent to neglecting energy
dissipation.
The arrow of time implies that the description of damage should proceed from the small to the
large: pico→nano→micro→macro. Transitional thresholds need to be defined for connecting the
segmented scales. Processes in real materials that experience ageing and damage entail energy
dissipation, a manifestation of the development and existence of inhomogeneities and interfaces.
Effective understanding and use of nanocomposites requires bridging the gap from the nanoscale behavior to that at the macro-scale, and ultimately the structural scale.
The introduction of mesoscale considerations provides a connection between detailed fine scale
analyses and large scale, coarse-grained, homogenized treatments. Multi-scale analyses aim to
link the scales by establishing frameworks for communicating the necessary quantities between
different levels of description.
It is with these objectives in mind that the theme of Mesomechanics 2009 in Oxford was
selected. The fact that the contributors to the conference proceedings volume address energy
dissipation across the range of scales in relation to mesomechanics considerations is the
indication of success of this choice.
The proceedings of this conference will be of interest to researchers and practitioners concerned
with the analysis of damage and dissipation in various engineering and physical systems, and
seeking to identify and establish better predictive procedures for designing reliable systems and
structures.

G.C. Sih et al. / Procedia Engineering 1 (2009) 1–3

The editors of this volume wish to express their gratitude to the authors for their contributions,
and sincerely hope that, with the help of the Mesomechanics 2009 meeting, we have moved one
step closer to understanding the elusive nature of assessing energy dissipation with account taken
of material microstructure effects. We hope that this spirit will continue to grow to new
strengths, and will be carried over into Mesomechanics 2010.

George C. Sih
Alexander M. Korsunsky
Daniele Dini
Oxford, United Kingdom
June, 2009

3

