Acta Mechanica 115, 119-131 (1996)

ACTA MECHANICA
9 Springer-Verlag 1996

On the geometrical material structure of anelasticity
M. Epstein, Calgary, Alberta, and G. A. Maugin, Paris, France
(Received October 3, 1994)

Summary. G-structures are the geometric backbone of the theory of material uniformity in continuum
mechanics. Within this geometric framework, anelasticity is seen as a result of evolving distributions of
inhomogeneity reflected as material nonintegrability. Constitutive principles governing the time evolution of
the G-structure underlying the finite-strain theory of anelasticity (e.g., plasticity) are proposed. The material
Eshelby stress tensor is shown to be the driving force behind this evolution. This should allow for
a thermodynamically admissible formulation of anelasticity viewed as a G-structure evolution.

1 Introduction
As a natural sequel to our previous work [1] dealing with Eshelby's tensor in finite elasticity, we
present herein a geometrical interpretation of some of the phenomena taking place in finite
anelasticity. An appealing feature of the geometrical approach is that its terminology has been
often matched to that of the theory of continuous distributions of dislocations. Since plasticity is
largely a process of rearrangement of dislocation patterns, it seems natural to attempt to cast it
within this geometrical mold. Another advantage of this approach is that it seems to naturally
subsume the ideas of finite-strain plasticity without the need for any additional conceptual
framework. Most notable is the notion of intermediate configuration, which has been the source of
no little confusion. The interplay between symmetries due to material isotropy, as opposed to
those induced by the Euclidean or the deformation metric, is brought to bear at the appropriate
junctions in the presentation.
No attempt has been made to provide a rigorous differential geometric derivation of the
concepts involved. Nevertheless, Section 2 presents a largely self-contained informal approach to
G-structures, the main geometric construct to be manipulated, in the context of material
uniformity. In Section 3, two constitutive principles are laid down for the evolution of dislocation
distributions, principles mainly of consistency with the material symmetry group: the principle of
G-covariance and the principle of actual evolution. Section 4 briefly explores thermodynamical
restrictions in terms of the Eshelby tensor. Contact with more traditional presentations involving
a multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient and an intermediate configuration is
established in Section 5. By focussing on a limited number of issues, we hope that this short paper
will be of help in elucidating some theoretical aspects of finite-strain anelasticity.

2

Elastic uniformity and homogeneity

Most engineering materials can be characterized, as far as their mechanical response is
concerned, by the behaviour of an infinitesimal parallelepiped undergoing homogeneous
deformations, namely, deformations that transform it into another infinitesimal paralMepiped.

120

M. Epstein and G. A. Maugin

Such deformations are represented mathematically by a non-singular two-point tensor H. The
original parallelepiped, arbitrarily chosen once and for all, can be called the reference crystal, to
distinguish it from its deformed counterpart. Although each of these inhabits its own space, they
can both be seen against the background of physical Euclidean space, which is endowed with
a natural metric and a natural parallel translation. If a basis e~ (c~ = 1, 2, 3) is chosen in the
reference crystal, and another E; (I = 1, 2, 3) in the deformed one, then the two-point tensor
H will have components H~x such that a vector

(1)

v = v%
is mapped by H into the vector

Hv = HJv~EI

(2)

in the deformed crystal. In particular, the base vector e~ is mapped into the vector

(3)

E~ = HJEI.

If these convected base vectors E~ are used as a basis instead of Er (Fig. 1), then the components of
any vector v and of its image Hv are identical.
A hyperelastic material is characterized by a single scalar function
W = W(H)

(4)

measuring the strain energy per unit volume of the reference crystal as a function of its
deformation. Since our interest lies mainly in solids, which possess natural or undistorted states,
we may assume that the reference crystal is in one of those states and that the value of W is zero in
it. This corresponds to H equal to the identity of the Euclidean background. When a body B of
finite extent is to be analyzed, it is placed in a global reference configuration. The material
response is then given by a strain-energy function
w~

w~(r; x)

=

(5)

per unit volume of reference configuration, where F is the gradient of the deformation evaluated
at the point X of B. This F is also a two-point tensor. If all the points of the body are made of the
same hyperelastic material, then one should be able to establish the existence of a two-point
tensor field P(X), which maps the reference crystal to an infinitesimal neighbourhood of each
point X in the global reference configuration in such a way that a perfect graft is achieved,
namely, that the response of the grafted reference crystal is mechanically indistinguishable from

JES
(b)

e~

(a)

Fig. 1. Deformation of the reference crystal: a reference crystal,
b deformed crystal

121

Geometrical material structure of anelasticity
(b)

~(a)

(c)

Fig. 2. Deformation of a body: a reference crystal,
b reference configuration, e deformed configuration

that of the point X. To express this condition mathematically, we note that to any deformation
gradient F measured off the reference configuration at a point X (Fig. 2), there corresponds
a deformation gradient

H = FP(X)

(6)

measured off the reference crystal, so that the strain energy per unit volume of the reference
configuration may be expressed as
wR = WR(F; X) = S,-* W(FP(X)),

(7)

where Je is the absolute value of the determinant of P(X), effecting the transition from reference
crystal volume to reference configuration volume. A material body satisfying condition (7) is said
to be uniform. If for every point X of B there exists a neighborhood within which uniformity maps
P(X) can be prescribed smoothly, the body is said to be smoothly uniform.
A good way to visualize a field of uniformity maps P(X) is by means of the convected bases
E~ discussed above. It is convenient to refer to the fields of triads E~ thus induced as a moving
crystallographic basis (Fig. 3). It is not difficult to see that there is, in general, a certain degree of
freedom in the choice of the crystallographic bases. This freedom is afforded by the material

(c)

(a)

Fig. 3. A crystallographic basis: a fixed basis in the reference
crystal, b uniformity field P(JO, c moving crystallographic basis in
the reference configuration

122

M. Epstein and G. A. Maugin

symmetry group ~q of the reference crystal, that is, by the collection of all tensors G such that
(8)

W(HG) = W(H),

for all non-singular H. Physically, this means that the crystal is mechanically indifferent to
a previously applied deformation G. It is assumed, on physical grounds, that all such symmetries
are density preserving, which means that the determinant of G is +_1, and, therefore, by (7):
WR = Wa(F; X) = J e - 1 W ( F P ( X ) ) = Je~t W(FP(X) G),

(9)

which shows that P(X) Gis again a uniformity field. Conversely, let Q(X) be a different uniformity
field such that de = JQ. It follows then that there exists a unique tensor field G(X), with
determinant +_1, such that Q = PG, satisfying
WR(F; X) = J r - t W(FP(X)) -= Jq - ~W(FQ(X)) = Je - ~W(FP(X) G(X))

(10)

for all non-singular F. Renaming H = FP, it is clear from (10) that G(X) belongs to ft. This shows
that given one field of uniformity P(X), the totality ~(X) of uniformity fields is given by
(11)

~(X) = P f X ) ~.

A similar kind of reasoning would convince us that the symmetry group f#x at a point Xin the
reference configuration is related to that of the reference crystal by
~qx = P(X) NP-I(X),

(12)

where P(X) is any one of the possible uniformity fields. In terms of ~r the degree of freedom in the
choice of uniformity fields is given by (r
This should be intuitively clear: to pass from
a given P to another, we first apply a symmetry transformation to the reference crystal and follow
with the given P; or we first apply the given P and follow it with a symmetry transformation at the
point X; or we perform a combination of those operations in succession (Fig. 4).
In terms of crystallographic bases, this group degree of freedom can be seen as follows: a fixed
basis in the reference crystal induces at each point X, by means of the set N(X), a subset of all the
permissible bases at that point. The "size" of this subset is obviously dictated by the group. What
we have obtained, technically speaking, is a G-structure, namely, a reduction of the principal
bundle of frames FB, obtained by attaching at each point thefibre consisting of all possible bases.
Whereas FB has the general linear group GL(3) as its structural group, since all base changes are

~.~
G
(a)

(b)
Fig. 4. The group degree of freedom: a reference crystal,
b reference configuration

Geometrical material structure of anelasticity

123

,(c)--

,a
/
/J'

(

f

!

/(b)-<.
I

./"~(a)

f

e
~X

j~~dyB

Fig. 5. The G-structure as a reduction of the principal frame
bundle FB: a section, choosing one element from each fibre,
b reduced fibre at X, consisting of all admissible bases, e fibre of
FB at X, consisting of all possible bases

permissible in FB, the reduced principal sub-bundle, which admits only those bases prescribed by
~, has the reduced structural group f~, a subgroup of GL(3), which controls all permissible base
changes. From the pictorial representation of Fig. 5, one can clearly see that prescribing one
particular uniformity field implies, in general, making a choice: one element from each fibre. This
is called a section of the G-structure. It may not be possible to choose a section which is globally
smooth, but if the body is smoothly uniform, for each point there exists a neighborhood where
the (local) section is smooth.
A smooth local section may or may not be integrable. Integrability would mean that the
crystallographic basis field is the natural basis of some (curvilinear) coordinate system in N. In
that case, we can give a change of configuration so that this coordinate system straightens itself
and, therefore, all the P's in the coordinate patch become constant. If local sections can be found
so that this can be done around every point, the G-structure is said to be integrable. Physically,
this obviously means that the body is locally homogeneous, that is, it can be conceived as chunks,
each of which could be straightened to yield a configuration in which the strain-energy function
has exactly the same form at all points of the chunk. If this can be done for the body as a whole,
that is, if a global integrable section exists, the body is (globally) homogeneous. For example, an
initially straight homogeneous bar can be bent arbitrarily without loosing its homogeneity. If,
however, its free ends are welded together without relative twist, the resulting ring is only locally
homogeneous. A hollow sphere made of suitably arranged orthotropic layers is not even locally
homogeneous.
The aim of this Section has been to reveal in a rather elementary fashion the geometrical
underpinnings of inhomogeneity theory. More detailed accounts can be found in [2]- [6].

3

Anelasticity as G-structure evolution

As long as a body experiences only elastic deformations, governed by the hyperelastic
constitutive equation law (7), the material G-structure, which, as we have seen, expresses
geometrically the distribution of inhomogeneities, remains unchanged. In models of elastoviscoplasticity, it is often assumed that the material still has a recoverable strain energy, but that
this energy is linked to only a multiplicative part of the deformation gradient. In our geometric

124

M. Epstein and G. A. Maugin

picture this simply means that viscoplasticity involves a mechanism which modifies the material
G-structure. This interpretation is physically appealing, since its physical translation is:
viscoplasticity involves a mechanism which modifies the distribution of material inhomogeneities.
The law of evolution from one G-structure to another is obviously a matter of experimentally
based constitutive modelling. It is possible, however, to lay down a number of principles to be
satisfied by any proposed law of behaviour. These principles can be obtained as answers to the
following questions:
(i) If the G-structure is given in terms of sections, is the evolution law independent of the
particular section chosen?
(ii) Does the proposed law actually prescribe an evolution to a different G-structure?
(iii) What is the driving force behind the evolution?
(iv) Are there any thermodynamical restrictions?
In this Section we shall answer the first two questions, leaving the last two for the next.
(i) Let P(X) and Q(X) be two smoothly time-dependent sections of the frame bundle
FB, and assume that at time t = 0 both sections belong to the same G-structure, i.e.,
there exists G e ~ such that
Q(0) = P(0) G.

(13)

We will say that the two sections evolve in parallel if

O(t) = P(t) G

(14)

for all t in a time interval of interest. Two sections evolving in parallel belong, at any instant, to the
same instantaneous G-structure, since they differ by an element of the structural group only. In
the case of a continuous symmetry group, condition (14) could be relaxed to permit G itself to be
a smooth function of time within the group. The stronger condition (14) corresponds to the
intuitive idea that both sections are doing exactly the same thing, like two synchronized dancers,
and they represent, therefore, exactly the same evolution. We, therefore, establish the following:
G-eovarianee principle: a law of evolution must be form-invariant under parallel changes of sections

within the structural group.
To obtain an explicit mathematical restriction equivalent to the G-covariance principle, we
differentiate (14) at t = 0 and (13) to get

QQ-1 = / ~ p - 1,

(15)

where superposed dots denote time derivatives. We conclude that sections that evolve in parallel
have at all times the same inhomogeneity velocity gradient
Lv = / ~ P - 1.

(16)

Conversely, if two given laws of evolution P(t) and Q(t) satisfy the condition Lv = LQ identically
at all times, and if at time t = 0 they satisfy the initial condition (13), then writing

Q(t) = V(t) M(t),

(17)

where M is some time dependent matrix, we obtain by differentiation the following ordinary
differential equation for M(t):

()(t) = P(t) M(t) + e(t)/~/(t),

(18)

Geometrical material structure of anelasticity

125

which, by virtue of (17), can be rewritten as

O(t) = t'(t) e-~(t) ~ t ) + v(t) ~l(t).

(19)

Multiplying by Q-l(t) to the right, and invoking the assumed identity of the inhomogeneity
velocity gradients, we finally obtain:
P(t) 3)/(t) Q-1(0 = O,

(20)

which can only be satisfied if M(t) = constant. We have just proved that parallel sections are
completely characterized by having the same inhomogeneity velocity gradient. We conclude,
therefore, that for the G-covariance principle to hold, it is necessary and sufficient that P(X) enter
the evolution law only through Le.
(ii) If the symmetry group of the material is continuous, such as in the case of full or
transverse isotropy, then a smooth law of evolution for a section may simply be prescribing
a change of section within the same G-structure, taking advantage of the group degree of
freedom. In that case, in spite of an apparently legitimate evolution law, the dislocation pattern
does not actually evolve at all. That happens if, and only if, at all times the instantaneous section
is related to the section at, say, time t = 0 by
P(t) = ax(t) P(o),

(21)

where Gx(t) is a time-dependent member of the symmetry group Nx in the global reference
configuration. Differentiating (21) we obtain, at t = 0,
(22)

[~ = (~xP,

which can be rewritten as
(23)

Le = Gx.

Since, by (21), Gx(0) is the identity, (~ is nothing but an element of the Lie algebra of ff~. We arrive
at the following:

Principle of actual evolution: For a law o f evolution to prescribe at all times an actual change o f
inhomogeneity distribution, Lp must not belong to the lie algebra of the instantaneous symmetry
group (#x.

The principle of actual evolution can be best illustrated in the case of a fully isotropic solid, for
which the reference crystal symmetry group is the full orthogonal group, whose Lie algebra is the
set (2 of all skew-symmetric matrices. In the reference configuration the Lie algebra is obtained by
the conjugation O~ = Pf2P -1. Introducing, therefore, in the reference configuration the
section-independent metric
c ~ = ( P e T) - 1,

(24)

the inhomogeneity velocity gradient can be uniquely resolved into the sum of a Cp- 1-symmetric
part LpD and a Cp-X-skew-symmetric part Lpw satisfying
LeDCp- 1 = Cp- 1L rpu

(25)

and
LpwC P- 1 =

T ,
--Cp - 1Lvw

(26)

126

M. Epstein and G. A. Maugin

respectively. We remark that this decomposition is independent of the particular section within
the G-structure. The principle of actual evolution requires that the evolution law prescribe a
nonvanishing LpD. In other words, this principle says that the evolution law must allow for a non
C e - 1_skew symmetric part of Le. Such a criterion applies only to the fully isotropic case. For
a discrete symmetry group, for example, any non-trivial law in terms of Lp is evolutive.

4

Eshelby's tensor and thermodynamics

The naturality whereby Eshelby's tensor emerges in the context of uniformity theory as the
driving force behind inhomogeneities has been demonstrated elsewhere [1]. Briefly stated,
a change of section that implies a change of G-structure will bring about an energy change that
can be evaluated directly from (7) as
0 WR/~P = - (WRI - F r Ta) (pr)- 1 = _ b(pr)- 1,

(27)

where
b = ___~WR p r = W n I - FTTR
~P

(28)

is the quasi-static Eshelby tensor, and where
TR = aWR/OF

(29)

is the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress. The duality between P and b thus established, it appears
reasonable to demand that the evolution law for LF be driven by the present value of b, and,
indeed, such a law has already been proposed [7]. It is important to note in this respect that b itself
is independent of the P-section chosen within the same G-structure.
Within a thermodynamic context, we can set the preceding theory against a thermoelastic
background [8] - [9] assuming ab-initio constitutive laws for the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress TR,
the material heat flux vector qR, the entropy ~TR per unit reference volume, and the free energy
~R per unit reference volume, in terms of the independent variables F, O, and VRO, representing,
respectively, the deformation gradient, the absolute temperature, and its referential gradient.
Uniformity requires, before any thermodynamic restrictions, the existence of a field P(X) such
that, for instance, the free energy ~R in the reference configuration be expressible in terms of the
free energy 7' in the reference crystal as
~ I~(F, 6), V RO; X) = J p - l gJ(FP(X), O, Pr(X) 17RO),

(30)

where P(X) now evolves in time. Upon introducing this equation in the reduced form of the
Clausius-Duhem inequality

~R + 5aR0 + O - l q R " 17RO - tr (TRT~ =< 0,

(31)

and using the chain rule of differentiation, we obtain, by the standard argument
T~ = ~3~g/aF,

(32)

5aR = - c3tPR/0O,

(33)

agJR/~VRO = 0,

(34)

Geometrical material structure of anelasticity

127

and the residual inequality
tr (brLp) + O - lqR" VgO <=O,

(35)

where the quasi-static thermoelastic Eshelby tensor is defined as before, but with the free energy
in place of the strain energy. Since b is always symmetric with respect to the deformation-induced
metric
C = FrF,

(36)

it would appear at first sight that the residual inequality prescribes that only the C -1skew-symmetric part of Lp is free of anelastic dissipation. This would be in contradiction with the
physical intuition that a mere change of P-section within the same G-structure, by not involving
any rearrangement of dislocations, should also not produce any dissipation. And, indeed, we
have proved elsewhere [1] that b produces no power on an Le which belongs to the Lie algebra of
the symmetry group fix. This is in complete agreement with the results of the previous Section. In
summary of this point, the Eshelby tensor b has two symmetries. The first one is the C-symmetry
which must be guaranteed a priori by the functional form of Wso as to satisfy the balance of
angular momentum. This symmetry is expressed by the condition [1] (subscript A indicates the
skew-symmetric part)

b C = Cb r

or

(bC)A =

0.

(37.1)

The second symmetry is of material origin. It consists of having a zero inner product (mechanical
power) with the Lie algebra of fix. Thus, for instance, in the case of full isotropy the second
symmetry reads

bC. = Ceb r

or

(bCe)A = O.

(37.2)

Correspondingly, a thermodynamic statement such as (35) is indifferent to additive changes in
LF which are either C - 1_skew symmetric or (in the case of full isotropy) Cp- 1_skew symmetric.
Considering the space of C - 1_skew symmetric tensors, on the one hand, and the instantaneous
Lie algebra of fix, on the other, as vector subspaces of the space of all tensors, one might say that
thermodynamics imposes a restriction only on that part of L~ which is orthogonal to both
subspaces, with respect to the ordinary inner product of tensors.

5

Comparison with standard finite-strain anelasticity

The above-described approach sees anelasticity as evolving material inhomogeneity, expressed
in terms of a G-structure whose time evolution is constrained by rather general principles. The
latter, in fact, also has to respect the time arrow of the second law of thermodynamics. Apart from
a nondissipative contribution of the "gyroscopic" type akin to the Hall effect in electricity, it may
even be dictated by this inequality and general features abstracted from experiment, e.g., the
existence of a closed convex domain of stresses, and the existence or nonexistence of
a characteristic time. Therefore, this is the proper place to compare the present approach,
fundamentally rooted in differential geometry, and those kinematic-thermodynamic approaches
which have become more or less generally accepted in the last twenty years [10]- [14]. In these
approaches the integrable deformation gradient Fis multiplicatively decomposed into elastic and

128

M. Epstein and G. A. Maugin
(b)
X

(a)

Q~
(c)

Fig. 6. Standard multiplicative decomposition: a intermediate configuration, b reference configuration,
c deformed configuration

anelastic parts, Fe and Fp, following essentially Lee [10] (Fig. 6):
r =

ePP,

(3s)

where none of Fe and i~p is integrable (i.e., is a true gradient). We set
C = frF,

Ce = F~rL,

s

= Fv['p -1 .

(39)

Here Ce is the deformed metric in the so-called intermediate configuration o f e;/2e, the plastic
distorsion rate according to Mandel's [11] terminology, is a mixed tensor on cue. With a free
energy density ~ e per unit volume of CUe taken as a function of Fe (or (~e), O and an extra set of
thermodynamic state variables e (here an n-dimensional Cartesian vector) referred to as internal
variables and introduced to account for hardening phenomena (see, e.g., [12], [14]), the residual
dissipation inequality is shown to read
~ e = tr {Se" CeLl,} + d ~ - O - t f p - lqR. VR0 > O,

(40)

where Jp = det Fp, and
d = -O~e/O~,

Ne = 23~e/SCfe.

(41)

The second of these is the second (symmetric) Piola-Kirchhoff stress relative to ~fe. As S e is
symmetric contravariant, only the symmetric part of/Ze with respect to Ce, i.e., (CeLe)s, may
produce a dissipation. With the now familiar formalism of pseudo-dissipation potentials, one is
thus led to general anelastic evolution equations of the type
(CeLe)s = 0 ~ / 0 S e ,

a = O~/0~d,

(42)

where ~ is a pseudo-dissipation potential having a certain degree of (mathematical) homogeneity
with respect to (Se, d ) . In the case of a plastic-like behaviour (no viscosity), ~ is homogeneous of
degree one only, and Eqs. (42) are shown to be replaced by singular limits [14]
(CeLe)s = ), ~fN~'

d~= "~ a~'Of

(43.1, 2)

Geometrical material structure of anelasticity

129

where 2 > 0 is the plastic multiplier and f ( S e , s~r O) = 0 is the flow surface. According to
Mandel [11], the local orientation of the intermediate configuration is indicated by a triad of
directors attached to the crystallographic lattice in order to remedy the arbitrariness of the
orientation. On account of this remark we can draw a parallel with our own formulation above.
As F has to be the same in the two formulations, we see that the definition H = FP translates to
F = l i P - 1, and the roles of H a n d P - a are thus played by Fe and F~,, respectively, in the standard
formulation, so that the plastic distorsion rate Lp and the inhomogeneity velocity gradient Lp are
necessarily related by
(44)

LP = -- P - 1L~,P.

Contrary to s our Lp, just like the Eshelby stress b, is a true (mixed) material tensor. In this case
the identification of our reference crystal to the isoclinic intermediate configuration of Mandel
[11] holds good, although we interpret the relationship between the reference crystal and the
reference configuration as a cogent manifestation of material inhomogeneity. This coincides with
the fact that it is the combination H = FP which enters the relevant energy density or, if we
prefer, a metric based on it.
As it stands, Eq. (43.1) connects the evolution of the dislocation pattern with variables
derivable from a stress tensor rather than from an Eshelby like tensor. Furthermore, it violates
the G-covariance principle, assigning thus an undue physical role to the intermediate
configuration. O u r argument here is that those missing features are of prime importance for the
formulation of a completely kinematic-thermodynamically consistent theory. Our thermodynamic reasoning, based on the simple functional dependence indicated in (30), could easily be
extended to include a set of internal variables e which better reproduce the complexity of
dissipative mechanisms at play in finite-strain anelasticity. Thus, (35) is to be replaced by
~x = - tr (brLp) + A~ - O - lqR" VRO > 0

(45)

where A = - ~ 7JR/Oe. As we do not grant any diffusive property to the variable e, i.e. Vga does not
appear in 7~R, the definition of b is left unchanged compared to the thermoelastic case.
To conclude this Section it m a y be appropriate to give a flavour of what an elementary
constitutive theory based on (45) m a y look like. First, because of the general symmetry condition
(37), only the symmetric part of L~ with respect to C - 1 m a y be thermodynamically constrained
to satisfy the residual dissipation inequality. This follows from the fact that, on account of (37.1)
we can write
tr (bTLp) = tr{(bCC- 1)r Lp} = tr {(bC) (LpC- 1)s}.

(46)

This leaves the skew-symmetric part (LpC-1)A indetermined by thermodynamics.
Second, for a general behaviour for which one expects evolution laws for both L~, and c~, one
can assume - compare to (42) - the existence of a pseudo-dissipation potential ~(b, A),
positively homogeneous of degree n in (b, A), such that (discarding the coupling with heat
conduction at the constitutive level for the sake of simplification)
Lp = - O~/Ob,

~ = ~/OA.

(47)

With 9 homogeneous of degree two, this would provide linear-affine expressions as if we had
applied the standard theory of irreversible processes to the inequality (45). This describes
anelastic phenomena of the viscosity-relaxation type as a characteristic time is inevitably built in
Eqs. (47).

130

M. Epstein and G. A. Maugin

But just like temperature, the deformation-induced metric C may appear parametrically in 9.
For instance, we may introduce the f o l l o w i n g f u l l y covariant material Eshelby stress:
(48)
where
,= -- C . S . C = ~ r ,

S = T R ( F - t)r = S r

(49)

are a fully covariant stress tensor and the second (contravariant) Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor,
respectively. On account of Eqs. (46) to (49), with N = ~(IB, A) positively homogeneous of degree
n in (N, A), we find that Eqs, (47) are replaced by
( L , C - % = - ~N/(?IB,

~ = ON/OA.

(50)

As we know from a purely elastic analysis, tensors S and 113are most naturally given constitutive
equations within the framework of the "inverse-motion" description, for which the free energy
density is considered a function WR = ~(IE, O), where IE is the Piola finite-strain measure
defined by [15], [16]:

1

9= g ( 1 - c-1);

(51)

in this case [15], [161
(52)
For a plastic-like (rate-independent, with threshold in stress) behaviour, ~ is positively
homogeneous of degree one only, and the evolution equations (50) take a singular form akin to
(43), exhibiting no longer any characteristic time. But contrary to (40) and (43), the evolution
equations (50), or their singular plastic-like limits, satisfy the G-covariance requirement. The
implications of evolution equations such as (47) or (50) remain to be critically examined versus
those of the more standard, but non-G-covariant, formulation (40).

6

Conclusions

By way of conclusion, we note that we have framed the special case of finite-strain anelasticity in
the general framework of G-structures and the theory of material uniformity. The true (material)
Eshelby stress plays a direct and essential role in the accompanying thermomechanical construct.
Specific constitutive laws requiring a thorough examination of material symmetry in this
unifying geometric view remain to be proposed. What must be retained for the moment is that the
thermodynamic restriction embodied in the second law "feels" only a certain portion of Lp,
which is even smaller than usually assumed. By constructing a plastic potential that respects such
criterion (namely, its derivative with respect to b lies in that small orthogonal complement of the
sum of two snbspaces) one will legitimately claim "pure dissipativity" of the accompanying
anelastic behaviour, a macroscopic manifestation of rearrangements of defect patterns.

Geometrical material structure of anelasticity

131

Acknowledgements
The first author gratefully acknowledges the support of the University of Calgary, the Universit6 Pierre et
Marie Curie (LMM-CNRS, France), the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and
the Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas (I.M.EE, Madrid). Special thanks go to Dr. M. de Leon.

References
[1] Epstein, M., Maugin, G. A.: The energy-momentum tensor and material uniformity in finite elasticity.
Acta Mech. 83, 127-133 (1990).
[2] Noll, W.: Materially uniform simple bodies with inhomogeneities. Arch. Rat. Mech. Anal. 27, 1 - 32
(1967).
[3] Wang, C. C.: On the geometric structure of simple bodies, a mathematical foundation for the theory of
continuous distributions of dislocations. Arch. Rat. Mech. Anal. 27, 3 3 - 9 4 (1967).
[4] Bloom, E: Modern differentialgeometric techniques in the theory of continuous distributions of
dislocations. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, No. 733. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer 1979.
[5] Cohen, H., Epstein, M.: Remarks on uniformity in hyperelastic materials. Int. J.-Solids Struct. 20,
233-243 (1984).
[6] Elzanowski, M., Epstein, M., Sniatycki, J.: G-structures and material inhomogeneity. J. Elasticity 23,
167-180 (1990).
[7] Maugin, G. A.: Eshelby stress in elastoplasticity and ductile fracture. Int. J. Plasticity 10, 393-408
(1994).
[8] Epstein, M.: Eshelby-like tensors in thermoelasticity. In: Nonlinear thermomechanical processes in
continua (Muschik, W., Maugin, G. A., eds.) 61, pp. 147-159. Berlin: TUB-Dokumentation 1992.
[9] Epstein, M., Maugin, G. A.: Thermoelastic material forces: definition and geometric aspects (submitted
for publication, 1994).
[10] Lee, E. H.: Elastic plastic deformation at finite strain. A.S.M.E. Trans. J. Appl. Mech. 36, 1 - 6 (1969).
[11] Mandel, J.: Equations constitutives et directeurs darts les milieux plastiques et viscoplastiques. Int.
J. Solids Struct. 9, 725-740 (1972).
[12] Lubliner, J.: Plasticity theory. New York: McMillan 1990.
[13] Cleja-Tigoiu, S., Soos, E.: Elastoviscoplastic models with relaxed configurations and internal state
variables. Appl. Mech. Rev. 43, 131-151 (1990).
[14] Maugin, G. A.: The thermomechanics of plasticity and fracture. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press 1992.
[15] Maugin, G. A., Trimarco, T.: Note on a mixed variational principle in finite elasticity. Rend. Mat. Accad.
Lincei 3, 6 9 - 7 4 (1992).
[16] Maugin, G. A.: Material inhomogeneities in elasticity. London: Chapman and Hall 1993.
Authors' addresses: M. Epstein, University of Calgary, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 2500
University Drive N. W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4; G. A. Maugin, Universit6 Pierre et Marie Curie,
Laboratoire de Mod61isation en M6canique (URA CNRS 229), Tour 66, 4 Place Jussieu, 75252 Paris C6dex
05, France

