arXiv:1912.10560v1 [math-ph] 22 Dec 2019

Reflections on the structural and constitutive
approaches to the theory of defects
Marcelo Epstein∗

To Yair Tene, fifty years later
Abstract
An attempt is made to bring into harmony two of the paradigms commonly used in the theory of continuous distributions of defects. It is shown
that the common differential geometric apparatus is provided neatly by the
theory of G-structures. In the case of a structural model, based on putative experimental observations at the microscopic level, a G-structure can
be shown to emerge from the group of linear transformations that preserve
a tensorial quantity. For the phenomenological (macroscopic) constitutive
model, the G-structure arises from the notion of material isomorphism and
the underlying local symmetry group of the constitutive law. A comparative
example is presented in the framework of certain smectic liquid crystals.
Keywords: Material isomorphism; uniformity; principal bundles; Gstructures; liquid crystals; smectics.

1

Introduction

We will concern ourselves in these notes with two conceptually different
paradigms that can be used to describe continuous distributions of defects in
material bodies. These two paradigms can be roughly summarized as follows:
∗

University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.

1

1. The structural paradigm is based on the imposition on the body of an
additional geometric structure, which, it may be argued, is observable
under a putative microscope. This structure is represented usually by
one or more tensor fields over the continuum. The standard case consists of three linearly independent vector fields, supposedly representing
an observable atomic lattice. In non-strictly crystalline materials, such
as certain smectic liquid crystals, one may postulate the existence of a
1-form, representing the partial arrangement of atomic planes typical
of smectics. Some feature of this differential geometric structure is then
used to define the presence of material defects.
2. The constitutive approach, steadfastly holding on to a purely macroscopic point of view, consistent with the epistemological view that a
continuum theory does not recognize the existence of atomic structures
per se, was promulgated by Noll [9] and Wang [12] in the 1960s. Assuming that all the information about the material constitution of a body
should be entirely contained in the constitutive functionals observable
at the macroscopic level, the concept of material isomorphism is used
as the basis for the generation of a well-defined differential geometric
structure, which may or may not be integrable, in a precise sense. The
failure of integrability reveals the presence of defects.
A third approach, not included in our treatment here, is the Volterra
paradigm, which considers the continuous limit of a sequence of Volterra cutand-glue operations. It has been shown in [6] that this limit is, in a precise
sense, equivalent to some version of the structural paradigm. It is noteworthy
that the structural and constitutive paradigms, stemming from apparently
disparate viewpoints, lead in many cases to identical criteria to detect the
presence of continuous distributions of defects. This coincidence manifests
itself in the fact that, although starting from different points of departure,
they end up invoking the same geometrical apparatus.
When the structural paradigm is adopted, the absence of dislocations
associated with the given tensor field (or fields) can be summarized as the
answer to the following question: Is there a (local) chart such that the components of this tensor field (or fields) are constant throughout the chart? If
the answer to this question is in the affirmative, we can reinterpret the chart
as a local change of configuration and thereby obtain a tensor field invariant
under Euclidean translations. If, for example, the tensor field is a differential
2

1-form, the condition for this to be the case is that the form must be closed.
If, instead, the additional geometric structure consists of a field of bases, the
condition is that the field must be holonomic, that is, the Lie bracket (or
commutator) of each pair of the vector fields involved must vanish.
In contradistinction, the point of departure for the constitutive paradigm
is the notion of material isomorphism. Roughly speaking, two material points
are said to be materially isomorphic if their constitutive equations can be
brought into exact correspondence by a mere distortion or, somewhat more
precisely, by a change of local reference configuration. A body is materially
uniform if all of its points are mutually materially isomorphic. A uniform
body is locally homogeneous (or defect-free) if every point has a neighbourhood such that a change of configuration renders the constitutive law independent of position.
One of the obvious differences between these two paradigms is that the
material symmetries encoded in the constitutive laws do not seem to play any
role in the structural paradigm. To elucidate this and other aspects of the
comparison of the two approaches, it is useful to carry out the formulation
in the natural geometric setting provided by the linear frame bundle of the
body manifold, and its associated bundles.

2

The linear frame bundle and its associated
bundles

2.1

Review of fibre bundles

Recall that a material body B is defined as a smooth manifold of dimension
n = 3. As such, each material point X ∈ B is endowed with a tangent space
TX B, which is an n-dimensional vector space. Each vector v ∈ TX B is an
equivalence class
S of mutually tangent smooth curves through X. The formal
union T B =
TX B is itself a smooth manifold of dimension 2n, which
X∈B

is called the tangent bundle of B. We think of it as a smooth collection of
tangent spaces, each of which is assigned to a point of B. But it is precisely
this assignation what gives a very special extra structure to the manifold T B,
and this is precisely what is meant by the word bundle. We think of B as the
base manifold and of TX B as the fibre over the point X ∈ B
More generally, a smooth fibre bundle is a smooth manifold C and a
3

smooth surjective map π : C → B onto a smooth manifold B, called the
base manifold. Technically, we require the projection to be a submersion.
The inverse image CX = π −1 (X) is called the fibre at X ∈ B. We require,
moreover, the condition of local triviality, which essentially requires that, locally, the fibre bundle resembles a Cartesian product. More specifically, for
each point X ∈ B, there is an open neighbourhood U ⊂ B and a smooth and
smoothly invertible map ψ : π −1 (U) → U × F , where F is a smooth manifold
called the typical fibre of the bundle. This map ψ, called a local trivialization, is fibre preserving, namely, pr1 ◦ ψ = π. In other words, if we apply
the map ψ to a point in the fibre over X we obtain a point of the product
that lies precisely over X, and not anywhere else. We have denoted by pr1
the projection over the first factor of a Cartesian product. This definition
sounds very intricate, but it is in fact very intuitive, as suggested in Figure
1.
We are still not done with the definition, since we left the best for last.
Noting that all the fibres CX are mutually diffeomorphic (they all look the
same, so to speak),1 we ask what is the relation between two local trivializations whose domains have a non-empty intersection. If ψ1 : π −1 (U1 ) → U1 ×F
and ψ2 : π −1 (U2 ) → U2 ×F are two local trivializations such that U1 ∩U2 6= ∅,
the transition between the first and the second is the map ψ12 = ψ2 ◦ ψ1−1 :
pr1−1 (U1 ∩ U2 ) → pr1−1 (U1 ∩ U2 ). At each point X of the intersection U1 ∩ U2 ,
the transition map is a transformation of F . We will require that this transformation can only be construed as the left action of an element g of a fixed
group G acting smoothly on the left on F , and that the dependence of g on
X must be smooth. This group, which must be specified as part and parcel
of the definition, is called the structure group of the bundle. In the case of
the tangent bundle, the typical fibre is an n-dimensional vector space, and we
allow all the possible linear automorphisms. Put differently, the typical fibre
of the tangent bundle of a smooth n-dimensional manifold is Rn , and the
structure group is the general linear group GL(n; R), which can be regarded
as the group of all non-singular n × n matrices. The left action of the group
on the typical fibre is, in this case, the matrix multiplication of a matrix
times the column of the vector components in some basis. To summarize, a
bundle consists of 5 ingredients and can be notated as (C, B, π, F , G).
A section (or cross section) of a bundle (C, B, π, F , G). is a smooth map
σ : B → C such that π ◦ σ = idB . In words, a section assigns smoothly to
1

The diffeomorphism between fibres, however, is in general not canonical.

4

ψ1
ψ2

ψ12
F

π

|

pr1

U1 X
B
{z
}
U2
{z
}
|

|

U1 X
B
{z
}
U2
{z
}
|

Figure 1: Schematic representation of a bundle and two trivializations
each element X of the base manifold an element of its fibre CX . In physical
applications, a section is a field over B. The nature of the field is given by the
nature of the fibre. Thus, a section of the tangent bundle is a field of tangent
vectors. A local section is a section of π −1 (U), where U is a connected open
subset of B.

2.2

Principal bundles

Consider a bundle (C, B, π, F , G), and let F ′ be manifold on which the group
G has a smooth left action. Then, leaving everything else unchanged, including the local trivializations, we obtain a new fibre bundle (C, B, π, F ′ , G) with
typical fibre F ′.2 Two bundles related in this way are said to be mutually
associated.
Since a group always has a natural left action on itself (by left translation), given a bundle (C, B, π, F , G) we can always construct the associated
bundle (C, B, π, G, G), namely, a bundle whose typical fibre coincides with
the structure group. This bundle is known as the principal bundle associated
with the bundle of departure. It is essential, but not difficult, to show that in
a principal bundle there is also a canonical right action of the structure group
on the total space C. In fact, the fibres can be regarded as the orbits of this
action. The existence of this right action is traceable to the existence of two
canonical actions of a group on itself, namely, the left and right translations.
It is not difficult to show that if p belongs to C the right action by a group
2

This construction is nicely explained and justified in [10], p 43.

5

element g ∈ G moves p to a point pg on the same fibre as p. If ψ is a local
trivialization, then we have that pg = ψ −1 (ψ(p)g), where, with a clear abuse
of notation, we use the apposition ag to indicate the right action of g on an
element a, whether a belongs to a fibre of C or to the typical fibre G.
Starting from the tangent bundle T B, consider at each point X of B the
collection
S FX B of all bases of the tangent space TX B. The formal union
FB =
FX B is a fibre bundle with the same trivialization maps as the
X∈B

tangent bundle. It is called the (linear) frame bundle of B. A local section of
this bundle is a moving frame (or repère mobile). At each point X of an open
set U ⊂ B, we have n linearly independent tangent vectors e1 , ..., en . Under a
trivialization ψ, each of these vectors is mapped into a vector ψ(eα ) = Aβα gβ ,
where gβ (β = 1, ..., n) is the standard basis of Rn , and where the summation
convention is used. The components Aβα form a non-singular matrix, which
shows that the fibres are in a one-to-one correspondence with the general
linear group GL(n; R).3 The transition functions between two trivializations
amount to a left translation of the typical fibre GL(n; R), as can be verified
directly.
We conclude that the linear frame bundle is, in fact, the principal bundle
associated with the tangent bundle. The right action over the bundle can be
exposed by noticing that, having chosen arbitrarily a basis eα (α = 1, ..., n)
of TX B, each basis fβ at X can be expressed as fβ = f αβ eα . The right
µ
R) is the basis Rg (f) whose elements are
action by an element
 g να ∈ µGL(n;

µ
µ
α
g ν fµ = g ν f µ eα = f µ g ν eα .
Other (non-principal) bundles associated with the frame bundle F B are
the various tensor bundles. For example, the cotangent bundle T ∗ B is obtained by assigning to each point X ∈ B the dual space TX∗ B of TX B. Higher
order tensor bundles are obtained by respective tensor products of copies of
T B and T ∗ B.

2.3

G-structures

An important question in the theory of principal bundles is the possibility
of reducing a principal bundle to another principal bundle whose structure
group is a subgroup of the original. More precisely, let P = (C, B, π, G, G) be
a principal bundle and let G ′ be a proper subgroup of G. Consider another
principal bundle of the form P ′ = (C ′ , B, π, G ′ , G ′ ), that is, a principal bundle
3

More technically, each fibre is a G- torsor.

6

over the same base manifold B but with the smaller structure group G ′ ⊂
G. We say that P ′ is a reduction of P if there exists a fibre-preserving
differentiable map f : P ′ → P such that
∀p ∈ C ′ , g ∈ G ′ .

f (pg) = f (p)g

(1)

A useful way to imagine a reduction is to think of the reduced bundle P ′
as having as its total space a submanifold C ′ of C, with the property of being
closed precisely under the action of the subgroup G ′ . This means that, under
′
the right action of g ∈ G every point p of the sub-fibre CX
⊂ CX has the
property of remaining in this sub-fibre if, and only if, g ∈ G ′ .4 In particular,
a principal bundle is reducible to the trivial subgroup if, and only if, it admits
a global section. For a principal bundle this condition is equivalent to the
existence of a global trivialization.
Definition 1 A G-structure on an n-dimensional base manifold B is a reduction of the frame bundle F B to a subgroup G of the general linear group
GL(n; R).

3

The material G-structure

3.1

Introduction

Having reviewed some basic geometric concepts, we proceed now to establish the relevance of G-structures in the theory of continuous distributions of
dislocations. We will follow a two-pronged approach. In this section, we will
arrive at the concept of a so-called material G-structure, uniquely (modulo
conjugation) determined by the constitutive equation of a uniform body. In
other words, we will be following the constitutive paradigm. In the next section, quite independently, we will rather adopt the structural paradigm and
we will show how it too leads naturally to the emergence of a corresponding G-structure, which, for lack of a better term, we will call the geometric
G-structure.

3.2

Material uniformity

For definiteness, we restrict the treatment to elastic constitutive equations.
Following the standard notation of continuum mechanics, if we adopt a refer4

A rigorous proof of this assertion can be found in [11], pp 296, 310.

7

ence configuration for the body B and adopt thereat a (Cartesian) coordinate
system X I (I = 1, 2, 3), a deformation maps the body into the translation
space of R3 , with (Cartesian) coordinates xi (i = 1, 2, 3), according to 3
smooth functions xi = χi (X 1 , X 2, X 3 ) with strictly positive Jacobian determinant. The deformation gradient F at a point X is given in coordinates by
the Jacobian matrix, whose entries are the partial derivatives F iI = ∂χi /∂X I .
An elastic constitutive equation specifies the components sij of the Cauchy
stress tensor s as smooth functions of the deformation gradient and the body
point, namely, s = s(F, X).
Definition 2 Two body points, X1 , X2 ∈ B are materially isomorphic if
there exists a linear isomorphism P12 between their respective tangent spaces
in the reference configuration such that s(F, X2 ) = s(FP12 , X1 ), identically
for all deformation gradients F.
Note 3.1 This definition is the mathematical expression of the fact that
the two points are made of the same material. Indeed, the constitutive
equation depends subtly also on the reference configuration chosen. A change
of reference configuration (which clearly does not affect the intrinsic material
properties) results in the multiplication of the deformation gradient to the
right by the Jacobian matrix of this change of reference. A constitutive
response, therefore, is not to be identified with a particular function, but
rather with a whole orbit of functions under the right action of the general
linear group on the matrix argument. Two points are materially isomorphic
if, and only if, their constitutive equations lie in the same orbit.
We observe that a material symmetry G at a point X is nothing but a material automorphism, that is, G satisfies the identity s(F, X) = s(FG, X).
Moreover, given a material isomorphism P12 between X1 and X2 , both P12 G1
and G2 P12 are also material isomoprhisms, where G1 and G2 are, respectively, material symmetries at X1 and X2 . It follows that the symmetry
groups of two materially isomorphic points are mutually conjugate, the conjugation being achieved by any material isomorphism between the two points.
Definition 3 A body is said to be materially uniform if all its points are
materially isomorphic to each other. The body is smoothly uniform if every
point has a neighbourhood over which the material isomorphism can be chosen
as smooth functions of the material point X.
The two definitions listed above were originally given by Noll [9].
8

3.3

Construction of the material G-structure

Since material isomorphism is clearly an equivalence relation, when we are
given a smoothly uniform body we may choose any point, X0 say, as a material archetype for the whole body. If its constitutive equation is s̄(F) =
s(F, X0 ), we can describe the global constitutive equation as
s(F, X) = s̄(FP(X)),

(2)

where P(X) is a material isomorphism from X0 to X. This field cannot
in general be chosen smoothly over the whole body, but it certainly can be
so chosen over each member of an open covering of B, since the body was
assumed to be smoothly uniform.
If, as done in Figure 2, we place the archetype outside of the body, for
convenience of the representation, we can visualize each material isomorphism P(X) as a material implant of the archetype. Just as in a surgical
implant, the archetype is in general deformed to fit the damaged area, but
the material properties are unaltered.
Consider the non-empty intersection of two open sets in the above mentioned cover. For each point of this intersection we have two different material
isomorphisms with the archetype, say P and P′ , both from X0 to X. But
the composition P′ P−1 is a material isomorphism of the archetype with itself. Consequently, the point-wise transition functions over the non-empty
intersection belong to the symmetry group of the archetype. We have thus
constructed a principal bundle whose structure group is the symmetry group
of the archetype. But recalling that material symmetry groups are subgroups
of the general linear group, we have obtained a G-structure.
The presence of material defects (continuous distributions of dislocations,
say) manifests itself by the lack of flatness of this G-structure, as presented,
for example, in [4]. We will not go any further in this direction, since our
main objective is only to compare the geometric structures entailed by the
constitutive and structural paradigms. In this respect, an article by Marı́n
and de León [7] presents many relevant details that are beyond this general
presentation.

9

P(X)

Archetype

Figure 2: Material implants

4

The geometric G-structure

4.1

Tensors of type H

The traditional way of defining a tensorial quantity at a point of a manifold
consisted of giving some indexed quantities (the components of the tensor in
some coordinate system) and then stipulating how these components change
upon a coordinate transformation. This supposedly old-fashioned definition
can be embellished and dissimulated under the cloak of more modern terminology to produce the more general notion of a tensor field whose components
at each point of an n-dimensional manifold B take values on an arbitrary vector space.
Let H be a finite-dimensional real vector space on which the general linear
group GL(n; R) acts on the left. We start by forming the Cartesian product
F B ×H. To be sure, the elements of this product are the ordered pairs (f, h),
where f ∈ F B and h ∈ H. The first element f is a basis of the tangent space
at π(f ) ∈ B, while we can think of the second element as giving us the idea
of components in some sense related to this basis.
Inspired by the classical definition, we establish the following equivalence
relation between pairs: (f1 , h1 ) ∼ (f2 , h2 ) if, and only if, there is a group
element g ∈ GL(n; R) such that (f2 , h2 ) = (f1 g, g −1h1 ). We can recognize
10

in this equivalence relation a kind of compensatory action, in the sense that
a geometric object (H-tensor) manifests itself by means of components that
depend on the basis chosen by counteracting the effect of a change of basis,
which explains why the left action on h is performed with the inverse of
the group element that, through its right action on f , performs the change
of basis. We can now consider the quotient space of this product by the
equivalence relation, that is: H = F B × H/ ∼. The elements of H are
precisely the equivalence classes themselves. It is not difficult to show that
H is a bundle over B with typical fibre H and structure group GL(n; R). It
is, therefore, a (non-principal) associated bundle of the linear frame bundle
F B.
The cross sections of H are tensor (fields) of type H. Alternatively,
and equivalently, we may regard these as entities defined directly over F B,
without reference to the associated bundle. In this case, we talk about a
tensor of type H over T B. Such a tensor is a smooth map t : F B → H
satisfynig the identity
t(f g) = g −1 t(f ),

∀g ∈ GL(n; R) f ∈ F B.

(3)

We have worked on the principal frame bundle, but the same idea can be
extended, mutatis mutandis, to any principal bundle.

4.2

G-structures generated by tensors

Although implicit in other treatments of G-structures, the notion of Gstructures defined by tensors is explicitly introduced and treated in detail
by Fujimoto [5]. A somewhat broader characterization is given in [7].
Suppose that we arbitrarily fix an element u of the vector space H. Since
GL(n; R) has been assumed to have a left action on H, we can define the
isotropy group of u as the set
Gu = {g ∈ GL(n; R) | gu = u}.

(4)

This is the largest closed subgroup of GL(n; R) that leaves u invariant. Consider now a Gu -structure Gu , that is, a reduction of F B that happens to have
Gu as its structure group. Let us define the constant map t : Gu → H given
by t(f ) = u for all f ∈ Gu . This map can be considered a tensor of type
H defined on Gu . Indeed, all pairs (f, u) over each fibre are related by the
11

equivalence relation ∼, since the structure group has been chosen precisely
to leave u invariant.
We would like to characterize a G-structure by means of a vector field on
F B, but so far we have been going in the opposite direction. Nevertheless,
to gain a better appreciation of what kind of properties a tensor over F B
must have so as to determine a G-structure, let us extend the constant map
t, defined so far on Gu only, to the whole frame bundle. By the basic property
(3) of tensors of type H, the extension t : F B → H can only be given by
t(f ) = g −1u,

(5)

while g runs over the whole general linear group. Clearly, t takes values only
on the orbit Hu of u, namely,
Hu = {gu | g ∈ GL(n; R)}.

(6)

We assume the map t to be differentiable.5
These two properties of the tensor t, namely, that it takes values on an
orbit of Hu and that it is differentiable, are enough to completely define a
G-structure whose structure group is the isotropy group of u.
Theorem 1 Giving a G-structure on B is the same as giving a tensor t :
F B → H of type H on F B which satisfies the following two conditions:
1. t takes values on Hu ;
2. t is a differentiable map (with an appropriate differentiable structure in
Hu ).
Given a tensor of type H with this property, the corresponding Gu structure
is the inverse image of u, namely, Gu = t−1 (u). In practical applications, one
may be able to choose a moving frame such that the components of the given
tensor field are constant. This moving frame is in the Gu structure.

4.3

Constructing the geometric G-structure

The basic tenet of the structural approach is the existence of an additional
geometric object superimposed on the body manifold. This object is supposedly observable experimentally by microscopy. If we assume it to be tensorial,
as one would expect in applications, we can generate the corresponding Gstructure, as defined above, and as illustrated in the following example.
5

See [5], p 22, for a proof of this fact and of the following theorem.

12

5

An example

5.1

A structural description of a smectic A

It is never easy to translate into mathematical terms a complex physical
phenomenon and to distinguish the essential from the accessory. The case of
smectic liquid crystals, however, provides an excellent example of clarity in
this regard. Thus, we read in [2]
Smectic liquid crystals have stratified structures but a variety
of molecular arrangements are possible within each stratification.
In smectic A the molecules are upright in each layer with their
centres irregularly spaced in a ‘liquid-like’ fashion ... The interlayer attractions are weak as compared with the lateral forces
between molecules and in consequence the layers are able to slide
over one another relatively easily.
Or, in added detail, as in [3],
Smectic liquid crystals consist of rod-shaped molecules that
spontaneously form both directional (nematic) order and a onedimensional density wave, commonly described as a layered system; the spacing between the layers is approximately the rod
length, a. In two dimensions, we can picture the layers as a set of
nearly equally spaced curves lying in the plane. The ground states
are characterized by both equal spacing between these curves and
vanishing curvature.
It is clear from these physical descriptions that smectics are not necessarily representable by Bravais lattices. In the continuous limit, we can
conjecture that a smectic is faithfully represented by a differential 1-form.
Indeed, as suggested in another physical context [8], if we picture a vector as
an arrow, then a covector should be represented by a stack of parallel planes
endowed with a certain density. The action of a covector on a vector can
be visualized as the ‘number’ of planes pierced by the arrow. Recall that a
differential 1-form is a smooth field of covectors. Consequently, a differential
1-form ω can be understood as the smooth specification of a stack of planes
at each point of B, as shown schematically in Figure 3. The resemblance to
the physical descriptions of a smectic A is obvious.
13

B

Figure 3: Pictorial representation of a differential 1-form on B
Suppose that this layering 1-form ω has been constructed on the basis of
smoothed-out averages of microscopic observations, without any prejudice to
constitutive equations of any kind. As a section of the cotangent bundle T ∗ B
(which is associated to the bundle of frames), we conclude that it gives rise
to a tensor over F B, in the sense explained in Section 4.1. We can adopt a
moving frame e1 , e2 , e3 (that is, a basis of TX B at each point X) such that its
dual basis, e1 , e2 , e3 , has ω = e1 as its first element. In this system, therefore,
the components of ω are given by the row vector < ω >=< 1, 0, 0 >. The
result of the left action of a matrix [g] ∈ GL(3; R) on a row vector < ω >
is the row vector < ω > [g]−1 (since the action on a column vector {v} is
[g]{v}, and the linear evaluation of covectors on vectors must be preserved).
We conclude that the isotropy group Gω of our < ω >=< 1, 0, 0 > (namely,
the collection of matrices such that < ω > [g]−1 =< ω >) consists of all the
matrices [k] of the form


1 0 0
[k] = a b c 
(7)
d e f
For physical reasons, we may want to further restrict this isotropy group by
demanding that, once a co-frame eα (α = 1, 2, 3) (that is, 3 linearly independent covectors) has been chosen, the volume form e1 ∧ e2 ∧ e3 must be
preserved. The implication of this additional condition is that the determinant of the matrix [k] must be equal to 1.
According to the notion of a G-structure defined by a tensor, as described
in Section 4.2, we conclude that the geometric G-structure generated by our
differential form consists of the given basis (e1 = ω, e2, e3 ) and all the bases
14

obtained from it via the right action of the isotropy group just described.

5.2

A constitutive model

The constitutive response of a hyperelastic material can be completely characterized by a single scalar function ψ of the deformation gradient F. The
principle of material frame indifference requires that this dependence be mediated exclusively by the (symmetric) right Cauchy-Green tensor C = FT F.
Clearly, for this definition to make sense, the Euclidean metric is presupposed. Be that as it may, in the constitutive approach we are at freedom to
choose any function ψ = ψ(C) that can, in principle, be determined from
macroscopic experiments in a laboratory, without any need to invoke microstructural considerations or microscopic observations.
Accordingly, we can imagine an experimental setup, perhaps in a biomaterials laboratory, capable of carrying out accurate measurements with soft
materials. The sample would be aligned with a machine-related Cartesian
coordinate system and then subjected to arbitrary values of the CauchyGreen tensor with Cartesian components CIJ measured with respect to the
unloaded reference configuration. Suppose that the execution of many experiments on the given sample leads to the following reasonably accurate
formula for the free energy ψ as a function of two scalar variables
ψ = ψ(r, d),

(8)

2
.
r = C22 C33 − C23 C32 = C22 C33 − C23

(9)

where d = det C, and where

An arbitrary function of these variables has precisely the material symmetries given by Equation (7), with the additional condition that det[k] = 1.
Therefore, the material G-structure of a uniform body modeled after the
archetypal constitutive equation (8) is precisely a reduction of the frame bundle F B to this subgroup of GL(3; R). Consequently, the material G-structure
coincides with the geometric G-structure.

6

Final thoughts

A shrewd inspection of the constitutive equation (8) would reveal that the
independent variable r can be regarded as the square of the magnitude of
15

the cross product of the deformed images of two initially orthonormal vectors
aligned with the referential coordinate axes X 2 and X 3 . It would appear,
therefore, that there has been a certain amount of borrowing of information
from the microscopic level. This may well have been the case, historically
speaking. Nevertheless, we have already witnessed other historical instances
when the process was actually reversed. Think, for example, of the atomic
theory, not so much the one that grew spontaneously out of the unique
genius of the ancient Greek mind, but that which arose out of observations
at the macroscopic level of chemical experiments by John Dalton (1766-1844)
and Amedeo Avogadro (1776-1856). Atoms had to be invented before they
could be observed more directly, two or three generations after the pioneers.
A similar historical phenomenon occurred when Max Planck (1858-1947)
reluctantly posited the quantized nature of electromagnetic radiation.
Within the more mundane framework of these notes, we may venture to
say that, if a constitutive equation such as (8) had been available at the
early stages of the discovery of liquid crystals, one would have been led to
suspect that there are preferred planes of some sort at the microscopic level,
as it turned out to be the case for smectics.6 What seems to be remarkable
is that at least some of the detailed geometric information that is made
available at the microscopic level is somehow encapsulated in the macroscopic
(phenomenological) constitutive equation. The theory of G-structures is the
common differential geometric apparatus that harmonizes the two paradigms
with each other.

References
[1] Bunge M A (1998), Philosophy of Science, Transaction Publishers, New
Brunswick, New Jersey.
[2] Chandrasekhar S (1992), Liquid crystals, 2nd. edition, Cambridge University Press.
6

The interrelation between scientific levels of discourse and its implications for the
question of scientific explanation have been considered at length by the noted Canadian
philosopher of science Mario Bunge [1]. Bunge distinguishes between subsumptive (or
phenomenological) and interpretive explanations, the latter involving a deeper analysis at
more basic levels of reality than the level to which the explanation belongs. With scholastic
irony, Bunge calls the former ‘explicatio obscurum per obscurius’.

16

[3] Chen BG, Alexander GP and Kamien RD (2009), Symmetry breaking in
smectics and surface models of their singularities, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA 106/37, 15577-15582.
[4] Elżanowski M, Epstein M and Śniatycki J (1990), G-structures and material homogeneity, J of Elasticity 23, 167-180.
[5] Fujimoto A (1972), Theory of G-structures, English edition, Publications
of the Study Group of Geometry, Vol. 1.
[6] Kupferman R and Maor C (2015), The emergence of torsion in the continnum limit of distributed dislocations, J Geom Mech 7, 361-387.
[7] Marı́n D and de León M (2004), Classification of material G-structures,
Mediterranean J of Mathematics 1, 375-416.
[8] Misner W, Thorne K S and Wheeler J A (1973), Gravitation, Freeman,
San Francisco.
[9] Noll W (1967), Materially Uniform Bodies with Inhomogeneities, Archive
for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 27, 1-32.
[10] Steenrod N (1951), The topology of fiber bundles, Princeton University
Press.
[11] Sternberg S (1983), Lectures on Differential Geometry, 2nd edition,
Chelsea Publishing, New York.
[12] Wang C-C (1967), On the Geometric Structure of Simple Bodies, a
Mathematical Foundation for the Theory of Continuous Distributions of
Dislocations, Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 27, 33-94.

17

